Barbarian
From the frozen wastes to the north and the hellish jungles of the
south come brave, even reckless, warriors. Civilized people call them
barbarians or berserkers and suspect them of mayhem, impiety, and
atrocities. These “barbarians,” however, have proven their mettle and
their value to those who would be their allies. To enemies who
underestimated them, they have proved their cunning,
resourcefulness, persistence, and mercilessness.
Adventures: Adventuring is the best chance barbarians have of
finding a place in a civilized society. They’re not well suited to the
monotony of guard duty or other mundane tasks. Barbarians also
have no trouble with the dangers, the uncertainties, and the
wandering that adventuring involves. Barbarians may adventure to
defeat hated enemies. They have a noted distaste for that which they
consider unnatural, including undead, demons, and devils.
Characteristics: The barbarian is an excellent warrior. Where
the fighter has training and discipline, however, the barbarian has a
powerful rage. While in this berserk fury, he becomes stronger and
tougher, better able to defeat his foes and withstand their attacks.
These rages leave him winded, and he only has the energy for a few
such spectacular displays per day, but those few rages are usually
sufficient. He is at home in the wilds, and he runs at great speed.
Alignment: Barbarians are never lawful. They may be honorable,
but at heart they are wild. This wildness is their strength, and it
could not live in a lawful soul. At best, chaotic barbarians are free
and expressive. At worst, they are thoughtlessly destructive.
Religion: Some barbarians distrust established religions and
prefer an intuitive, natural relationship to the cosmos over formal
worship. Others devote themselves to powerful deities, such as
Kord, god of strength; Obad-Hai, god of nature; or Erythnul, god of
slaughter. A barbarian is capable of fierce devotion to his god.
Background: Barbarians come from uncivilized lands or from
barbaric tribes on the outskirts of civilization. A barbarian
adventurer may have been lured to the settled lands by the promise
of riches, may have escaped after having been captured in his
homeland and sold into “civilized” slavery, may have been recruited
as a soldier, or may have been driven out of his home by invaders.
Barbarians share no bond with each other unless they come from
the same tribe or land. In fact, they think of themselves not as
barbarians but as warriors.
Races: Human barbarians come from the distant wild lands on
the edge of civilization. Half-orc barbarians lived among orcs before
abandoning them for human lands. Dwarf barbarians are rare,
usually hailing from dwarven kingdoms that have fallen into
barbarism as a result of recurrent war with goblinoids, orcs, and
giants. Barbarians of other races are very rare.
Among the brutal humanoids, barbarians are more common than
fighters. Orcs and ogres are especially likely to be barbarians.
Other Classes: As people of the wild, barbarians are most
comfortable in the company of rangers, druids, and clerics of nature
deities, such as Obad-Hai or Ehlonna. Many barbarians admire the
talents and spontaneity of bards, and some are enthusiastic lovers of
music. Barbarians don’t trust that which they don’t understand, and
that includes wizardry, which they call “book magic.” Barbarians
find sorcerers more understandable than wizards, but maybe that’s
just because sorcerers tend to be more charismatic. Monks, with
their studied, practiced, deliberate approach to combat, sometimes
have a hard time seeing eye to eye with barbarians, but members of
these classes aren’t necessarily hostile to each other. Barbarians have
no special attitudes toward fighters, paladins, clerics, or rogues.
GAME RULE INFORMATION
Barbarians have the following game statistics.
Abilities: Strength is important for barbarians because of its role
in combat, and several barbarian skills are based on Strength.
Dexterity is also useful to barbarians, especially those who wear light
armor. Wisdom is important for several barbarian skills. A high
Constitution score lets a barbarian rage longer (and live longer,
because it gives him more hit points).
Alignment: Any nonlawful.
Hit Die: d12.
Class Skills
The barbarian’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are
Climb (Str), Craft (Int), Handle Animal (Cha), Intimidate (Cha),
Intuit Direction (Wis), Jump (Str), Listen (Wis), Ride (Dex), Swim
(Str), and Wilderness Lore (Wis). See Chapter 4: Skills for skill
descriptions.
Skill Points at 1st Level: (4 + Int modifier) x 4.
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 4 + Int modifier.
Class Features
All of the following are class features of the barbarian.
Weapon and Armor Proficiency: A barbarian is proficient with
all simple and martial weapons, light armor, medium armor, and
shields. Note that armor check penalties for armor heavier than
leather apply to the skills Balance, Climb, Escape Artist, Hide, Jump,
Move Silently, Pick Pocket, and Tumble. Also, Swim checks suffer a
–1 penalty for every 5 pounds of armor and equipment carried.
Barbarian Rage: When he needs to, a barbarian can fly into a
screaming blood frenzy. In a rage, a barbarian gains phenomenal
strength and durability but becomes reckless and less able to defend
himself. He temporarily gains +4 to Strength, +4 to Constitution,
and a +2 morale bonus on Will saves, but suffers a –2 penalty to AC.
The increase in Constitution increases the barbarian’s hit points
by 2 points per level, but these hit points go
away at the end of the rage when the
Constitution score drops back to normal.
(These extra hit points are not lost first the
way temporary hit points are; see Temporary
Hit Points, page 129.) While raging, a
barbarian cannot use skills or abilities
that require patience and
concentration, such as moving
silently or casting spells. (The only
class skills he can’t use while
raging are Craft, Handle Animal,
and Intuit Direction.) He can
use any feat he might have
except for Expertise, item
creation feats, metamagic feats,
and Skill Focus (if it’s tied to a
skill that requires patience or
concentration). A fit of rage
lasts for a number of rounds
equal to 3 + the character’s
(newly improved) Constitution
modifier. The barbarian may
prematurely end the rage
voluntarily. At the end of the rage,
the barbarian is fatigued (–2 to Strength, –2 to
Dexterity, can’t charge or run) for the
duration of that encounter (unless the
barbarian is 20th level, when this
limitation no longer applies). The
barbarian can only fly into a rage once
per encounter, and only a certain
number of times per day
(determined by level). Entering a
rage takes no time itself, but the
barbarian can only do it during his
action (see Initiative, page 120), not
in response to somebody else’s action. A barbarian can’t, for example,
fly into a rage when struck down by an arrow in order to get the
extra hit points from the increased
Constitution, although the extra hit
points would be of benefit if he had gone
into a rage earlier in the round, before
the arrow struck.
Starting at 15th level, the barbarian’s
rage bonuses become +6 to Strength, +6
to Constitution, and a +3 morale bonus to
Will saves. (The AC penalty remains at –
2.)
Fast Movement: The barbarian has a
speed faster than the norm for his race by
+10 feet when wearing no armor, light
armor, or medium armor (and not
carrying a heavy load). For example, a
human barbarian in studded leather
armor has a standard speed of 40 feet.
Normally, humans have a speed of 30
feet. His speed when taking the double
move action is 80 feet (rather than 60),
and his running speed is 160 feet (rather
than 120).
Uncanny Dodge: Starting at 2nd
level, the barbarian gains the
extraordinary ability to react to danger
before his senses would normally allow him to do so. At 2nd level
and above, he retains his Dexterity bonus to AC (if any) regardless of
being caught flat-footed or struck by an invisible attacker. (He still
loses his Dexterity bonus to AC if immobilized.)
At 5th level, the barbarian can no longer be flanked; he can
react to opponents on opposite sides of him as easily as he can
react to a single attacker. This defense denies a rogue the ability
to use a flank attack to sneak attack the barbarian. The
exception to this defense is that a rogue at least four
levels higher than the barbarian can flank him (and
thus sneak attack him).
At 10th level, the barbarian gains an intuitive
sense that alerts him to danger from traps,
giving him a +1 bonus to Reflex
saves made to avoid traps and a +1
dodge bonus to AC against
attacks by traps. At 13th
level, these bonuses rise to
+2. At 16th, they rise to +3,
and at 19th they rise to +4.
Damage Reduction:
Starting at 11th level, the
barbarian gains the extraordinary
ability to shrug off some amount of injury
from each blow or attack. Subtract 1 from
the damage the barbarian takes each time
he is dealt damage. At 14th level, this
damage reduction rises to 2. At 17th, it
rises to 3. At 20th, it rises to 4. Damage
reduction can reduce damage to 0 but
not below 0.
Illiteracy: Barbarians are the
only characters that do not
automatically know how to
read and write. A barbarian
must spend 2 skill points to
gain the ability to read and
write any language he is able
to speak.
Ex8Barbarians
A barbarian who becomes lawful loses the ability to rage and cannot
gain more levels as a barbarian. He retains all the other benefits of
the class (fast movement, uncanny dodge, and damage reduction).

Bard
It is said that music has a special magic, and the bard proves that
saying true. Wandering across the land, gathering lore, telling
stories, working magic with his music, and living on the gratitude of
his audience: such is the life of a bard. When chance or opportunity
draws them into a conflict, bards serve as diplomats, negotiators,
messengers, scouts, and spies.
A bard’s magic comes from the heart. If his heart is good, a bard
brings hope and courage to the downtrodden and uses his tricks,
music, and magic to thwart the schemes of evildoers. If the nobles of
the land are corrupt, the good bard is an enemy of the state,
cunningly evading capture and raising the spirits of the oppressed.
But music can spring from an evil heart as well. Evil bards eschew
blatant violence in favor of manipulation, holding sway over the
hearts and minds of others and taking what enraptured audiences
“willingly” give.
Adventures: Bards see adventures as opportunities to learn. They
practice their many skills and abilities, and they especially relish the
opportunity to enter a long-forgotten ancient tomb, to discover
ancient works of magic, to decipher old tomes, to travel to strange
places, to encounter exotic creatures, and to learn new songs and
stories. Bards love to accompany heroes (and villains), joining their
entourage to witness their deeds firsthand—a bard who can tell a
marvelous story from personal experience earns renown among his
fellows. Indeed, after telling so many stories about heroes doing
mighty deeds, many bards take these themes to heart and assume
the role of hero themselves.
Characteristics: A bard brings forth magic from his soul, not
from a book. He can cast only a small number of spells, but he can
cast them without selecting or preparing them in advance. His
magic emphasizes charms and illusions over the more dramatic
evocation spells that wizards and sorcerers often use.
In addition to spells, a bard works magic with his music and
poetry. He can encourage allies, hold his audiences rapt, and counter
magical effects that rely on speech or sound.
Bards have some of the skills that rogues have, although they are
not as focused on skill mastery as rogues are. Bards listen to stories
as well as tell them, of course, so they have a vast knowledge of local
events and noteworthy items.
Alignment: Bards are wanderers, guided by whim and intuition
rather than by tradition or law. The spontaneous talent, magic, and
lifestyle of the bard are incompatible with a lawful alignment.
Religion: Bards revere Fharlanghn, god of roads. They
sometimes camp near his wayside shrines, hoping to earn some coin
from the travelers who stop to leave offerings for the god. Many
bards, even those who are not elven, worship Corellon Larethian,
god of elves and patron of poetry and music. Good bards are also
partial to Pelor, the sun god, believing that he watches over them in
their travels. Bards given to chaos and occasional larceny favor
Olidammara, god of thieves. Those who have turned to evil ways are
known to worship Erythnul, the god of slaughter, though few will
admit to it. In any event, bards spend so much time on the road that,
while they may be devoted to a deity, they are rarely devoted to any
particular temple.
Background: An apprentice bard learns his skills from a single
experienced bard, whom he follows and serves until he is ready to
strike out on his own. Many bards were once young runaways or
orphans, befriended by wandering bards who became their mentors.
Since bards occasionally congregate in informal “colleges,” the
apprentice bard may meet many of the more prominent bards in the
area. Still, the bard has no strong allegiance to bards as a whole. In
fact, some bards are highly competitive with other bards, jealous of
their reputations and defensive of their territory.
Races: Bards are commonly human, elven, or half-elven. Humans
take well to the wandering life and adapt easily to new lands and
customs. Elves are talented in music and magic, so the career of the
bard comes naturally to them. A bard’s wandering ways suit many
half-elves, who often feel like strangers even when at home. Halforcs, even those raised among humans, find themselves ill suited to
the demands of a bard’s career. There are no bardic traditions among
dwarves, gnomes, or halflings, though occasional individuals of
these races find teachers to train them in the ways of the bard.
Bards are exceedingly rare among the savage humanoids, except
among centaurs. Centaur bards sometimes train the children of
humans or other humanoids.
Other Classes: A bard works well with companions of other
classes. He often serves as the spokesman of the party, using his
social skills for the party’s benefit. In a party without a wizard or
sorcerer, the bard relies on his magic. In a party without a rogue, he
uses his skills. A bard is curious about the ways of more focused or
dedicated adventurers, often trying to pick up pointers from
fighters, sorcerers, and rogues.
GAME RULE INFORMATION
Bards have the following game statistics.
Abilities: Charisma determines how powerful a spell a bard can
cast, how many spells the bard can cast per day, and how hard those
spells are to resist. To cast a spell, a bard must have a Charisma score
of 10 + the spell’s level. A bard gets bonus spells based on Charisma.
The Difficulty Class of a saving throw against a bard’s spell is 10 +
the spell’s level plus the bard’s Charisma modifier. Charisma,
Dexterity, and Intelligence are important for many of the bard’s
class skills (see below).
Alignment: Any nonlawful.
Hit Die: d6.
Class Skills
The bard’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are Alchemy
(Int), Appraise (Int), Balance (Dex), Bluff (Cha), Climb (Str),
Concentration (Con), Craft (Int), Decipher Script (Int, exclusive
skill), Diplomacy (Cha), Disguise (Cha), Escape Artist (Dex), Gather
Information (Cha), Hide (Dex), Intuit Direction (Wis), Jump (Str),
Knowledge (all skills, taken individually) (Int), Listen (Wis), Move
Silently (Dex), Perform (Cha), Pick Pocket (Dex), Profession (Wis),
Scry (Int, exclusive skill), Sense Motive (Wis), Speak Language (Int),
Spellcraft (Int), Swim (Str), Tumble (Dex), and Use Magic Device
(Cha, exclusive skill). See Chapter 4: Skills for skill descriptions.
Skill Points at 1st Level: (4 + Int modifier) x 4.
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 4 + Int modifier.
Class Features
All of the following are class features of the bard.
Weapon and Armor Proficiency: A bard is proficient with all
simple weapons. Additionally, the bard is proficient with one of the
following weapons: longbow, composite longbow, longsword,
rapier, sap, short composite bow, short sword, shortbow, or whip.
Bards are proficient with light armor, medium armor, and shields.
Note that armor check penalties for armor heavier than leather
apply to the skills Balance, Climb, Escape Artist, Hide, Jump, Move
Silently, Pick Pocket, and Tumble. Also, Swim checks suffer a –1
penalty for every 5 pounds of armor or equipment carried. Like any
other arcane spellcaster, a bard can cast spells while wearing armor
or using a shield but suffers a chance of arcane spell failure if the
spell in question has a somatic component (most do).
Spells: A bard casts arcane spells from the bard spell list (page
159) according to Table 3–4: The Bard and Table 3–5: Bard Spells
Known. He casts these spells without needing to prepare them
beforehand or keep a spellbook. All bard spells have a verbal
component (singing, reciting, or music). Bards receive bonus spells
for high Charisma, and to cast a spell a bard must have a Charisma
score at least equal to 10 + the level of the spell (Cha 10 for 0-level
spells, Cha 11 for 1st-level spells, and so forth). The Difficulty Class
for a saving throw against a bard’s spell is 10 + the spell’s level + the
bard’s Charisma modifier.
Bardic Music: Once per day per level, a bard can use his song or
poetics to produce magical effects on those around him. Depending
on the ranks he has in the Perform skill, he can inspire courage in
allies, sing a countersong to protect those around him from soundbased magic, fascinate a creature, make a magical suggestion to a
fascinated creature, help others perform skills better, or inspire
greatness. While these abilities fall under the category of bardic
music, they can include reciting poetry, chanting, singing lyrical
songs, singing melodies (fa-la-la, etc.), whistling, playing an
instrument, or playing an
instrument in combination with
some spoken performance. As
with casting a spell with a verbal
component (see Components,
page 151), a deaf bard suffers a
20% chance to fail with bardic
music. If he fails, the attempt
still counts against his daily
limit.
Inspire Courage: A bard with
3 or more ranks in
Perform can use song or
poetics to inspire courage
in his allies, bolstering
them against fear and
improving their combat
abilities. To be affected, an
ally must hear the bard sing
for a full round. The effect
lasts as long as the bard sings
and for 5 rounds after the
bard stops singing (or 5 rounds
after the ally can no longer hear
the bard). While singing, the bard
can fight but cannot cast spells,
activate magic items by spell
completion (such as scrolls), or
activate magic items by magic word (such
as wands). Affected allies receive a +2 morale
bonus to saving throws against charm and fear
effects and a +1 morale bonus to attack and
weapon damage rolls. Inspire courage is a
supernatural, mind-affecting ability.
Countersong: A bard with 3 or more ranks in
Perform can use his music or poetics to
counter magical effects that depend on
sound (but not spells that simply have
verbal components). As with inspire
courage, a bard may sing, play, or recite
a countersong while taking other
mundane actions, but not magical
actions. Each round of the
countersong, he makes a Perform
check. Any creature within 30 feet of
the bard (including the bard himself)
who is affected by a sonic or languagedependent magical attack (such as sound burst or
command) may use the bard’s Perform check result in place of his
saving throw if, after rolling the saving throw, the Perform check
result proves to be better. The bard may keep up the countersong for
10 rounds. Countersong is a supernatural ability.
Fascinate: A bard with 3 or more ranks in Perform can use his
music or poetics to cause a single creature to become fascinated with
him. The creature to be fascinated must be able to see and hear the
bard and must be within 90 feet. The bard must also see the creature.
The creature must be able to pay attention to the bard. The
distraction of a nearby combat or other dangers prevents the ability
from working. The bard makes a Perform check, and the target can
negate the effect with a Will saving throw equal to or greater than
the bard’s check result. If the saving throw succeeds, the bard
cannot attempt to fascinate that creature again for 24 hours. If the
saving throw fails, the creature sits quietly and listens to the song for
up to 1 round per level of the bard. While fascinated, the target’s Spot
and Listen checks suffer a –4 penalty. Any potential threat (such as
an ally of the bard moving behind the fascinated creature) allows the
fascinated creature a second saving throw against a new Perform
check result. Any obvious threat, such as casting a spell, drawing a
sword, or aiming, automatically
breaks the effect.
While fascinating (or attempting
to fascinate) a creature, the bard
must concentrate, as if casting or
maintaining a spell. Fascinate is a
spell-like, mind-affecting
charm ability.
Inspire Competence: A bard
with 6 or more ranks in
Perform can use his
music or poetics to help
an ally succeed at a task.
The ally must be able to
see and hear the bard and
must be within 30 feet.
The bard must also see
the creature. Depending on
the task that the ally has at hand,
the bard may use his bardic music
to lift the ally’s spirits, to help the
ally focus mentally, or in some
other way. The ally gets a +2
competence bonus on his skill checks
with a particular skill as long as he or
she continues to hear the bard’s
music. The DM may rule that certain
uses of this ability are infeasible—
chanting to make a rogue move more
quietly, for example, is self-defeating.
The bard can maintain the effect for 2
minutes (long enough for the ally to
take 20). Inspire competence is a
supernatural, mind-affecting
ability.
Suggestion: A bard with 9 or
more ranks in Perform can
make a suggestion (as the
spell) to a creature that he has
already fascinated (see above).
The suggestion doesn’t
count against the bard’s
daily limit on bardic music
performances (one per
day per level), but the
fascination does. A Will
saving throw (DC 13 + the
bard’s Charisma modifier) negates the effect.
Suggestion is a spell-like, mind-affecting charm ability.
Inspire Greatness: A bard with 12 or more ranks in Perform can use
song or poetics to inspire greatness in another creature, granting
extra fighting capability. For every three levels the bard attains
beyond 9th, the bard can inspire greatness in one additional
creature. To inspire greatness, the bard must sing and the creature
must hear the bard sing for a full round, as with inspire courage. The
creature must also be within 30 feet. A creature inspired with
greatness gains temporary Hit Dice, attack bonuses, and saving
throw bonuses as long as he or she hears the bard continue to sing
and for 5 rounds thereafter. (All these bonuses are competence
bonuses.) The target gains the following boosts:
 +2 Hit Dice (d10s that grant temporary hit points).
 +2 competence bonus on attacks.
 +1 competence bonus on Fortitude saves.
Apply the target’s Constitution modifier, if any, to each bonus Hit
Die. These extra Hit Dice count as regular Hit Dice for determining
effects such as the sleep spell. Inspire greatness is a supernatural,
mind-affecting enchantment ability.
Bardic Knowledge: A bard picks up a lot of stray knowledge
while wandering the land and learning stories from other bards. A
bard may make a special bardic knowledge check with a bonus equal
to his level + his Intelligence modifier to see whether he knows
some relevant information about local notable people, legendary
items, or noteworthy places. This check will not reveal the powers of
a magic item but may give a hint as to its general function. The bard
may not take 10 or take 20 on this check; this sort of knowledge is
essentially random. The DM will determine the Difficulty Class of
the check by referring to the table below.
DC Type of Knowledge Examples
10 Common, known by at least A local mayor’s reputation for
a substantial minority drinking; common legends
of the local population. about a powerful place of
mystery.
20 Uncommon but available, A local priest’s shady past;
known by only a few people legends about a powerful
in the area. magic item.
25 Obscure, known by few, A knight’s family history;
hard to come by. legends about a minor place
of mystery or magic item.
30 Extremely obscure, known A mighty wizard’s childhood
by very few, possibly forgotten nickname; the history of a
by most who once knew petty magic item.
it, possibly known only by
those who don’t understand
the significance of the
knowledge.
Ex8Bards
A bard who becomes lawful in alignment cannot progress in levels
as a bard, though he retains all his bard abilities.

Cleric
The handiwork of the gods is everywhere, in places of natural beauty
and in mighty crusades, in soaring temples, and in the hearts of
worshipers. Like people, gods run the gamut from benevolent to
malicious, reserved to intrusive, simple to inscrutable. The gods,
however, work mostly through intermediaries—their clerics. Good
clerics heal, protect, and avenge. Evil clerics pillage, destroy, and
sabotage. A cleric uses the power of his god to make his god’s will
manifest. And if a cleric uses his god’s power to improve his own lot,
that’s to be expected, too.
Adventures: Ideally, a cleric’s adventures support his god’s
causes, at least in a general way. A good cleric, for example, helps
those in need. If, through noble acts, he can bring a good reputation
to his god or temple, that’s even better. An evil cleric seeks to
increase the power of himself and his deity, so that others will
respect and fear him.
Clerics sometimes receive orders, or at least suggestions, from
their ecclesiastical superiors, directing them to undertake missions
for the church. They and their companions are compensated fairly
for these missions, and the church may be especially generous with
casting of spells or divine magic items as payment.
Of course, clerics are people, too, and they may have all the more
common motivations for adventuring.
Characteristics: Clerics are masters of divine magic. Divine
magic is especially good at healing. Even an inexperienced cleric can
bring people back from the brink of death, and an experienced cleric
can even bring back people who have crossed over that brink.
As channelers of divine energy, clerics can turn away or even
destroy undead creatures. An evil cleric, on the other hand, can
bring undead under his control.
Clerics have some combat training. They can use simple weapons,
and they are trained in the use of armor, since armor does not
interfere with divine spells as it does with arcane spells.
Alignment: Like the gods they serve, clerics can be of any
alignment. Because people more readily worship good deities than
neutral or evil deities, good clerics are more numerous than evil
ones. Clerics also tend toward law instead of chaos, since lawful
religions tend to be more structured and better able to recruit and
train clerics.
Typically, a cleric is the same alignment as his deity, though some
clerics are “one step” away from their respective deities. For
example, most clerics of Heironeous, god of valor (who is lawful
good) are lawful good themselves, but some are lawful neutral or
neutral good. Additionally, a cleric may not be neutral unless his
deity is neutral. Exceptions are the clerics of St. Cuthbert (a lawful
neutral deity), who may only be lawful good or lawful neutral.
Religion: Every common deity has clerics devoted to
him or her, so clerics can be of any religion. The most
common deity worshiped by human clerics in
civilized lands is Pelor, god of the sun. Among
nonhuman races, clerics most commonly
worship the chief god of their respective
racial pantheon.
Some clerics devote themselves not to a
god but to a cause or a source of divine
power. These clerics wield magic the way
clerics devoted to individual gods do, but they
are not associated with a religious institution or
a particular practice of worship. A cleric devoted
to Good and Law, for example, may be on
friendly terms with the clerics of lawful and
good deities and may extol the virtues of a
good and lawful life, but he is not a functionary
in a church hierarchy.
Background: Most clerics are officially
ordained members of religious organizations,
commonly called churches. Each has
sworn to uphold the ideals of his or her
church. Most clerics join their churches
as young adults, though some feel
themselves devoted to a god’s service
from a young age and a few feel “the
call” later in life. While some
clerics are tightly bound to their
churches’ activities on a daily basis,
others have more free rein to
conduct their lives, as long as
they do so in accordance with
their gods’ wishes.
Clerics of a given
religion are all supposed
to get along, though schisms within a religion are often more bitter
than conflicts between religions. Clerics who share some basic
ideals, such as goodness or lawfulness, may find common cause with
each other and see themselves as part of an order or body that
supersedes any given religion. Clerics of opposed goals, however, are
sworn enemies. In civilized lands, open warfare between religions
occurs only during civil wars and similar social upheavals, but
vicious politicking between opposed churches is common.
Races: Clerics include members of all the common races, since
the need for religion and divine magic is universal. The clerics of
most races, however, are too focused on their religious duties to
undertake an adventurer’s life. Crusading, adventuring clerics
most often come from the human and
dwarf races.
Among the savage humanoids, clerics are
less common. The exception is troglodytes,
who take well to divine magic and are often led
by priests, who make a practice of sacrificing and
devouring captives.
Other Classes: In an adventuring party, the
cleric is everybody’s friend and often the glue that
holds the party together. As the one who can
channel divine energy, a cleric is a capable healer,
and adventurers of every class appreciate being put
back together after they’ve taken some hard knocks.
Clerics sometimes clash with druids, since druids
represent an older, more primal relationship
between the mortal and the divine.
Mostly, though, the religion of a
cleric determines how he gets along
with others. A cleric of Olidammara,
god of thieves, gets along fine with
rogues and ne’er-do-wells, for
example, while a cleric of
Heironeous, god of valor, rankles at
such company.
GAME RULE INFORMATION
Clerics have the following game statistics.
Abilities: Wisdom determines how powerful a spell a cleric can
cast, how many spells the cleric can cast per day, and how hard those
spells are to resist. To cast a spell, a cleric must have a Wisdom score
of 10 + the spell’s level. A cleric gets bonus spells based on Wisdom.
The Difficulty Class of a saving throw against a cleric’s spell is 10 +
the spell’s level + the cleric’s Wisdom modifier. A high Constitution
improves a cleric’s hit points, and a high Charisma improves his
ability to turn undead.
Alignment: Varies by deity. A cleric’s alignment must be within
one step of his deity’s, and it may not be neutral unless the deity’s
alignment is neutral.
Hit Die: d8.
Class Skills
The cleric’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are
Concentration (Con), Craft (Int), Diplomacy (Cha), Heal (Wis),
Knowledge (arcana) (Int), Knowledge (religion) (Int), Profession
(Wis), Scry (Int, exclusive skill), and Spellcraft (Int). See Chapter 4:
Skills for skill descriptions.
Domains and Class Skills: A cleric who chooses Animal or
Plant as one of his domains also has Knowledge (nature) (Int) as a
class skill. A cleric who chooses Knowledge as one of his domains
also has all Knowledge (Int) skills as class skills. A cleric who
chooses Travel as one of his domains also has Wilderness Lore as a
class skill. A cleric who chooses Trickery as one of his domains also
has Bluff (Cha), Disguise (Cha), and Hide (Dex) as class skills. See
Deity, Domains, and Domain Spells, below, for more information.
Skill Points at 1st Level: (2 + Int modifier) x 4.
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 2 + Int modifier.
Class Features
All of the following are class features of the cleric.
Armor and Weapon Proficiency: Clerics are proficient with all
simple weapons. Clerics are proficient with all types of armor (light,
medium, and heavy) and with shields. Note that armor check
penalties for armor heavier than leather apply to the skills Balance,
Climb, Escape Artist, Hide, Jump, Move Silently, Pick Pocket, and
Tumble. Also, Swim checks suffer a –1 penalty for every 5 pounds of
armor and equipment carried.
Some deities have favored weapons (see Deities, page 90), and
clerics consider it a point of pride to wield them. A cleric whose
deity’s favored weapon is a martial weapon and who chooses War as
one of his domains receives the Martial Weapon Proficiency feat
related to that weapon for free, as well as the Weapon Focus feat
related to that weapon. See Chapter 5: Feats for details.
Spells: A cleric casts divine spells according to Table 3–6: The
Cleric. A cleric may prepare and cast any spell on the cleric spell list
(page 160), provided he can cast spells of that level. (Alignment
restrictions mean that casting some spells may have unpleasant
consequences.) The Difficulty Class for a saving throw against a
cleric’s spell is 10 + the spell’s level + the cleric’s Wisdom modifier.
Clerics do not acquire their spells from books or scrolls, nor
prepare them through study. Instead, they meditate or pray for their
spells, receiving them through their own strength of faith or as
divine inspiration. Each cleric must choose a time at which he must
spend an hour each day in quiet contemplation or supplication to
regain his daily allotment of spells (typically, this hour is at dawn or
noon for good clerics and at dusk or midnight for evil ones). Time
spent resting has no effect on whether a cleric can prepare spells.
In addition to his standard spells, a cleric gets one domain spell of
each spell level, starting at 1st. When a cleric prepares a domain
spell, it must come from one of his two domains (see below for
details).
Deity, Domains, and Domain Spells: Choose a deity for your
cleric. Sample deities are provided on Table 3–7: Deities and in the
descriptions on page 90. The cleric’s deity influences his alignment,
what magic he can perform, his values, and how others see him.
If a race is listed under “Typical Worshipers” on Table 3–7, the
cleric must be of one of those races to choose that deity as his own
(the god may have occasional worshipers of other races, but not
clerics).
When you have chosen a deity and an alignment for your cleric,
choose two from among the deity’s domains for your cleric’s
domains. While the clerics of a particular religion are united in their
reverence for their deity, each religion encompasses different
aspects. You can only select an alignment domain (such as Good) for
your cleric if his alignment matches that domain.
If your cleric is not devoted to a particular deity, you still select
two domains to represent his spiritual inclinations and abilities (but
the restriction on alignment domains still applies).
Each domain gives your cleric access to a domain spell at each
spell level, from 1st on up, as well as a granted power. Your cleric
gets the granted powers of all the domains selected. With access to
two domain spells at a given spell level, a cleric prepares one or the
other each day. If a domain spell is not on the Cleric Spells list, a
cleric can only prepare it in his domain slot. Domain spells and
granted powers are listed in Cleric Domains, page 162.
For example, Jozan is a cleric of Pelor. He chooses Good and
Healing as his two domains. He gets both granted powers of his
selected domains. The Good domain allows him to cast all spells
identified by the good descriptor at +1 caster level (as if he were one
level higher in experience as a cleric) as a granted power, and it gives
him access to protection from evil as a domain spell. The Healing
domain allows him to cast all healing subschool spells of the
Conjuration school at +1 caster level as a granted power, and it gives
him access to cure light wounds as a domain spell. When Jozan
prepares his spells, he gets one 1st-level spell for being a 1st-level
cleric, one 1st-level spell for having a high Wisdom (15), and one
domain spell. The domain spell must be one of the two to which he
has access, either protection from evil or cure light wounds.
Spontaneous Casting: Good clerics (and neutral clerics of good
deities) can channel stored spell energy into healing spells that they
haven’t prepared ahead of time. The cleric can “lose” a prepared spell
in order to cast any cure spell of the same level or lower (a cure spell is
any spell with “cure” in its name). For example, a good cleric who
has prepared command (a 1st-level spell) may lose command in order
to cast cure light wounds (also a 1st-level spell). Clerics of good deities
can cast cure spells in this way because they are especially proficient
at wielding positive energy.
An evil cleric (or a neutral cleric of an evil deity), on the other
hand, can’t convert prepared spells to cure spells but can convert
them to inflict spells (an inflict spell is one with “inflict” in the title).
Such clerics are especially proficient at wielding negative energy.
A cleric who is neither good nor evil and whose deity is neither
good nor evil can convert spells either to cure spells or to inflict spells
(player’s choice), depending on whether the cleric is more proficient
at wielding positive or negative energy. Once the player makes this
choice, it cannot be reversed. This choice also determines whether
the neutral cleric turns or commands undead (see below).
Exceptions: All lawful neutral clerics of Wee Jas convert spells to
inflict spells, not cure spells. All clerics of St. Cuthbert and all nonevil
clerics of Obad-Hai convert spells to cure spells, not inflict spells.
A cleric can’t use spontaneous casting to convert domain spells
into cure or inflict spells. These spells arise from the particular powers
of the cleric’s deity, not divine energy in general.
Chaotic, Evil, Good, and Lawful Spells: A cleric can’t cast spells
of an alignment opposed to his own or to his deity’s. For example, a
good cleric or a neutral cleric of a good deity cannot cast evil spells.
Spells associated with the alignments of chaos, evil, good, and law
are identified as such on the “School, Subschool and Descriptors”
line of the spell description.
Turn or Rebuke Undead: A good cleric (or a neutral cleric who
worships a good deity) has the supernatural ability to turn undead,
such as skeletons, zombies, ghosts, and vampires, forcing these
unholy abominations to recoil from the channeled power of the god
the cleric worships. Evil clerics (and neutral clerics who worship
evil deities) can rebuke such creatures. Neutral clerics of neutral
deities can do one or the other (player’s choice), depending on
whether the cleric is more proficient at wielding positive or negative
energy. Once the player makes this choice, it cannot be reversed.
This choice also determines whether the neutral cleric can cast
spontaneous cure or inflict spells (see above). Exceptions: All lawful
neutral clerics of Wee Jas rebuke undead rather than turning them.
All clerics of St. Cuthbert and all non-evil clerics of Obad-Hai turn
undead rather than rebuking them. (See Turn and Rebuke Undead,
page 139.)
A cleric may attempt to turn or rebuke undead a number of times
per day equal to three plus his Charisma modifier.
Extra Turning: As a feat, a cleric may take Extra Turning. This
feat allows the cleric to turn undead four more times per day than
normal. A cleric can take this feat multiple times, gaining four extra
daily turning attempts each time.
Bonus Languages: A cleric’s list of bonus languages includes
Celestial, Abyssal, and Infernal, in addition to the bonus languages
available to the character because of his race (see Race and
Languages, page 12, and the Speak Language skill, page 73). These
are the languages of good, chaotic evil, and lawful evil outsiders,
respectively.
Ex8Clerics
A cleric who grossly violates the code of conduct expected by his
god (generally acting in ways opposed to the god’s alignment or
purposes) loses all spells and class features and cannot gain levels as
a cleric of that god until he atones (see the atonement spell
description, page 176).

Druid
The fury of a storm, the gentle strength of the morning sun, the
cunning of the fox, the power of the bear—all these and more are at
the druid’s command. The druid however, claims no mastery over
nature. That claim, she says, is the empty boast of a city dweller. The
druid gains her power not by ruling nature but by being at one with
it. To trespassers in a druid’s sacred grove, to those who feel the
druid’s wrath, the distinction is overly fine.
Adventures: Druids adventure to gain knowledge, especially of
animals and plants unfamiliar to them, and power. Sometimes, their
superiors call on their services. Druids may also bring their power to
bear against those who threaten what they love, which more often
includes ancient stands of trees or trackless mountains than people.
While druids accept that which is horrific or cruel in nature, they
hate that which is unnatural, including aberrations (such as
beholders and carrion crawlers) and undead (such as zombies and
vampires). They sometimes lead raids against such creatures,
especially when the creatures encroach on the druids’ territory.
Characteristics: Druids cast divine spells much the same way
clerics do, though most get their spells from the power of nature,
not from deities. Their spells are oriented toward nature and
animals. In addition to spells, druids gain an increasing array of
magical powers as they gain experience, including the ability to take
the shapes of animals.
The weapons and armor of a druid are restricted by traditional
oaths, not simply training. A druid could learn to use a two-handed
sword, but using it would violate the druid’s oath and suppress her
druidic powers.
Druids avoid carrying much worked metal with them because it
interferes with the pure and primal nature that they attempt to
embody.
Alignment: Druids, in keeping with nature’s ultimate
indifference, must maintain at least some measure of dispassion. As
such, they must be neutral in some way, if not true neutral. Just as
nature encompasses dichotomies of life and death, beauty and
horror, peace and violence, so two druids can manifest different or
even opposite alignments (neutral good and neutral evil, for
instance) and still be part of the druidic tradition.
Religion: Druids revere nature and gain their magical power
from the forces of nature itself or from a nature deity. They usually
pursue a mystic spirituality of transcendent union with nature
rather than devotion to a divine entity. Still, some of them revere or
at least respect either Obad-Hai, god of nature, or Ehlonna, goddess
of the woodlands.
Background: Though their organization is invisible to most
outsiders, who consider druids to be loners, druids are part of a
society that spans the land, ignoring political borders. A prospective
druid is inducted into this society through secret rituals, including
tests that not all survive. Only after achieving some level of
competence is the druid allowed to strike out on her own.
All druids are nominally members of the druidic society, though
some are so isolated that they have never seen high-ranking
members or participated in druidic gatherings. Still, all druids
recognize each other as brothers and sisters. Like true creatures of
the wilderness, however, druids sometimes compete with or even
prey on each other.
A druid may be expected to perform services for higher-ranking
druids, though proper payment is expected for these assignments.
Likewise, a lower-ranking druid may appeal for aid from her higherranking brethren, for a fair price in coin or service.
Druids may live in small towns but always spend a good portion
of their time in wild areas. Even large cities otherwise surrounded
by cultivated land as far as the eye can see often have druid groves
nearby—small, wild refuges where druids live and which they
protect fiercely. Near coastal cities, the refuge is often a nearby
island, where the druids can find the isolation they need.
Races: Elves and gnomes have an affinity for natural lands and
are commonly druids. Humans and half-elves are also frequently
druids, and druids are particularly common among savage humans.
Dwarves, halflings, and half-orcs are rarely druids.
Few from among the brutal humanoids are inducted into druidic
society, except that gnolls have a fair contingent of evil druids
among them. Gnoll druids are accepted by druids of other races, if
not welcomed.
Other Classes: Druids share with rangers and many barbarians a
reverence for nature and a familiarity with natural lands. Druids
dislike the paladin’s devotion to abstract ideals instead of “the real
world,” they don’t much understand the urban ways typical of a
rogue, and they find arcane magic to be disruptive and slightly
distasteful. Druids, however, are nothing if not accepting of
diversity, and they take little offense at others, even those very
different from them.
GAME RULE INFORMATION
Druids have the following game statistics.
Abilities: Wisdom determines how powerful a spell a druid can
cast, how many spells the druid can cast per day, and how hard those
spells are to resist. To cast a spell, a druid must have a Wisdom score
of 10 + the spell’s level. A druid gets bonus spells based on Wisdom.
The Difficulty Class of a saving throw against a druid’s spell is 10 +
the spell’s level + the druid’s Wisdom modifier.
Since a druid wears light or medium armor, a high
Dexterity improves her defensive ability.
Alignment: Neutral good, lawful neutral,
neutral, chaotic neutral, or neutral evil.
Hit Die: d8.
Class Skills
The druid’s class skills (and the key ability for
each skill) are Animal Empathy (Cha,
exclusive skill), Concentration (Con), Craft
(Int), Diplomacy (Cha), Handle Animal (Cha),
Heal (Wis), Intuit Direction (Wis),
Knowledge (nature) (Int), Profession (Wis),
Scry (Int, exclusive skill), Spellcraft (Int),
Swim (Str), and Wilderness Lore
(Wis). See Chapter 4: Skills for skill
descriptions.
Skill Points at 1st Level: (4 + Int
modifier) x 4.
Skill Points at Each Additional
Level: 4 + Int modifier.
Class Features
All of the following are
class features of the
druid.
Weapon and
Armor Proficiency:
Druids are proficient with
the following weapons:
club, dagger, dart, halfspear,
longspear, quarterstaff, scimitar, sickle,
shortspear, and sling. Their spiritual oaths prohibit them from using
weapons other than these. They are proficient with light and
medium armors but are prohibited from wearing metal armor (thus,
they may wear only padded, leather, or
hide armor). They are skilled with
shields but must use only wooden
ones. Note that armor check
penalties for armor heavier than
leather apply to the skills Balance,
Climb, Escape Artist, Hide, Jump, Move
Silently, Pick Pocket, and Tumble. Also,
Swim checks suffer a –1 penalty for every 5
pounds of armor and equipment carried.
A druid who wears prohibited armor or
wields a prohibited weapon is unable to
use any of her magical powers while doing
so and for 24 hours thereafter. (Note: A
druid can use wooden armor that has been
altered by the ironwood spell so that it
function as though it was steel. See the
spell description, page 218.)
Spells: A druid casts divine
spells according to Table 3–8: The
Druid. A druid may prepare and
cast any spell on the druid spell
list (page 166) provided she
can cast spells of that level. She
prepares and casts spells the way a
cleric does (though she cannot lose a
prepared spell to cast a cure spell in its
place). To prepare or cast a spell, a druid
must have a Wisdom score of at least 10 +
the spell’s level. The Difficulty Class for a
saving throw against a druid’s spell is 10 +
the spell’s level + the druid’s Wisdom
modifier. Bonus spells for druids are
based on Wisdom (see Table 1–1:
Ability Modifiers and Bonus Spells, page 8).
Chaotic, Evil, Good, and Lawful Spells: A druid can’t cast spells
of an alignment opposed to her own. For example, a neutral good
druid cannot cast evil spells. Spells associated with the alignments of
chaos, evil, good, and law are identified as such on the “School,
Subschool and Descriptors” line of the spell description.
Bonus Languages: A druid may substitute Sylvan for one of the
bonus languages available to her because of her race. In addition, a
druid knows the Druidic language. This secret language is known
only to druids, and druids are forbidden from teaching it to
nondruids. Druidic has its own alphabet.
Nature Sense: A druid can identify plants and animals (their
species and special traits) with perfect accuracy. She can tell
whether water is safe to drink or dangerous (polluted, poisoned, or
otherwise unfit for consumption).
Animal Companion: A 1st-level druid may begin play with an
animal companion. This animal is one that the druid has befriended
with the spell animal friendship. It can have up to 2 Hit Dice. (While
the druid is 1st level, this particular animal is loyal enough to stay
with her, even though an adventuring druid usually can only
maintain animal friends whose Hit Dice total up to her level.)
Alternatively, the druid may have more than one animal companion
provided the animals’ total Hit Dice don’t exceed 2.
Woodland Stride: Starting at 2nd level, a druid may move
through natural thorns, briars, overgrown areas, and similar terrain
at her normal speed and without suffering damage or other
impairment. However, thorns, briars, and overgrown areas that are
enchanted or magically manipulated to impede motion still affect
the druid.
Trackless Step: Starting at 3rd level, a druid leaves no trail in
natural surroundings and cannot be tracked.
Resist Nature’s Lure: Starting at 4th level, a druid gains a +4
bonus to saving throws against the spell-like abilities of feys (such as
dryads, nymphs, and sprites).
Wild Shape: At 5th level, a druid gains the spell-like ability to
polymorph self into a Small or Medium-size animal (but not a dire
animal) and back again once per day (see the polymorph self spell,
page 237). Unlike the standard use of the spell, however, the druid
may only adopt one form. As stated in the spell description, the
druid regains hit points as if she has rested for a day. Note: The
creatures available include some giant animals but not unnatural
beasts. The druid may wild shape into a dog or a giant lizard, for
example, but not into an owlbear. The druid does not risk the
standard penalty for being disoriented while in her wild shape (see
the polymorph other spell, page 236).
The druid can use this ability more times per day at 6th, 7th, 10th,
14th, and 18th level, as noted on Table 3–8: The Druid. In addition,
the druid gains the ability to take the shape of a Large animal at 8th
level, a Tiny animal at 11th level, and a Huge animal at 15th level. At
12th level or higher, she can take the form of a dire animal.
At 16th level or higher, the druid may use wild shape to change
into a Small, Medium-size, or Large air, earth, fire, or water
elemental once per day. She gains all the elemental’s special abilities
when she does so. At 18th level, she can do this three times per day.
Venom Immunity: At 9th level, a druid gains immunity to all
organic poisons, including monster poisons but not mineral poisons
or poison gas.
A Thousand Faces: At 13th level, a druid gains the supernatural
ability to change her appearance at will, as if using the spell alter self
(page 172).
Timeless Body: After achieving 15th level, a druid no longer
suffers ability penalties for aging (see Table 6–5: Aging Effects, page
93) and cannot be magically aged. Any penalties she may have
already suffered, however, remain in place. Bonuses still accrue, and
the druid still dies of old age when her time is up.
Ex8Druids
A druid who ceases to revere nature or who changes to a prohibited
alignment loses all spells and druidic abilities and cannot gain levels
as a druid until she atones (see the atonement spell description, page
176).

Fighter
The questing knight, the conquering overlord, the king’s champion,
the elite foot soldier, the hardened mercenary, and the bandit
king—all are fighters. Fighters can be stalwart defenders of those in
need, cruel marauders, or gutsy adventurers. Some are among the
land’s best souls, willing to face death for the greater good. Others
are among the worst, those who have no qualms about killing for
private gain, or even for sport. Fighters who are not actively
adventuring may be soldiers, guards, bodyguards, champions, or
criminal enforcers. An adventuring fighter might call himself a
warrior, a mercenary, a thug, or simply an adventurer.
Adventures: Most fighters see adventures, raids, and dangerous
missions as their job. Some have patrons who pay them regularly.
Others prefer to live like prospectors, taking great risks in hopes of
the big haul. Some fighters are more civic-minded and use their
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3:
C
L
A
S
S
E
S
36
combat skills to protect those in danger who cannot defend
themselves. Whatever their initial motivations, however, fighters
often wind up living for the thrill of combat and adventure.
Characteristics: Of all classes, fighters have the best all-around
fighting capabilities (hence the name). Fighters are familiar with all
the standard weapons and armors. In addition to general fighting
prowess, each fighter develops particular specialties of his or her
own. A given fighter may be especially capable with certain
weapons, another trained to execute specific fancy maneuvers. As
fighters gain experience, they get more opportunities to develop
their fighting skills. Thanks to their focus on combat maneuvers,
they can master the most difficult ones relatively quickly.
Alignment: Fighters may be of any alignment. Good
fighters are often crusading types who seek out and fight
evil. Lawful fighters may be champions who protect the
land and its people. Chaotic fighters may be
wandering mercenaries. Evil fighters tend to be
bullies and petty villains who simply take what
they want by brute force.
Religion: Fighters often worship
Heironeous, god of valor; Kord, god of
strength; St. Cuthbert, god of retribution;
Hextor, god of tyranny; or Erythnul, god
of slaughter. A fighter may style himself as
a crusader in the service of his god, or he
may just want someone to pray to before
putting his life on the line yet another
time.
Background: Fighters come to their
profession in many ways. Most have had
formal training in a noble’s army or at least in
the local militia. Some have trained in formal
academies. Others are self-taught—
unpolished but well tested. A fighter may
have taken up the sword as a way to
escape the limits of life on the farm, or
he may be following a proud family
tradition. Fighters share no special identity. They
do not see themselves as a group or brotherhood. Those who hail
from a particular academy, mercenary company, or lord’s regiment,
however, share a certain camaraderie.
Races: Human fighters are usually veterans of some military
service, typically from more mundane parents. Dwarven fighters are
commonly former members of the well-trained strike teams that
protect the underground dwarven kingdoms. They are typically
members of warrior families that can trace their lineages back for
millennia, and they may have rivalries or alliances with other
dwarven fighters depending on their lineages. Elven fighters are
typically skilled with the
longsword. They are proud of their
ability at swordplay and eager to
demonstrate or test it. Half-orc
fighters are often self-taught outcasts
who have achieved enough skill
to earn recognition and
something akin to respect.
Gnome and halfling
fighters usually stay in
their own lands as part
of the area militia
rather than
adventuring. Halfelves are rarely
fighters, but they
may take up
swordplay in honor
of the elven tradition.
Among the brutal
humanoids, few can
manage the discipline
it takes to be a true
fighter. The militaristic
hobgoblins, however,
produce quite a
number of strong and skilled
fighters.
Other Classes: The fighter
excels in a straight fight, but he
relies on others for magical
support, healing, and
scouting. On a team, it is his
job to man the front lines, protect the
other party members, and bring the tough opponents down.
Fighters might not much understand the arcane ways of wizards or
share the faith of clerics, but they recognize the value of teamwork.
GAME RULE INFORMATION
Fighters have the following game statistics.
Abilities: Strength is especially important for fighters because it
improves their melee attack and damage rolls. Constitution is
important for giving fighters lots of hit points, which they’ll need in
their many battles. Dexterity is important for fighters who want to
be good archers or who want access to certain Dexterity-oriented
feats, but the heavy armor that fighters usually wear reduces the
benefit of a very high Dexterity.
Alignment: Any.
Hit Die: d10.
Class Skills
The fighter’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are Climb
(Str), Craft (Int), Handle Animal (Cha), Jump (Str), Ride (Dex), and
Swim (Str). See Chapter 4: Skills for skill descriptions.
Skill Points at 1st Level: (2 + Int modifier) x 4.
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 2 + Int modifier.
Class Features
All of the following are class features of the fighter.
Weapon and Armor Proficiency: The fighter is proficient in
the use of all simple and martial weapons and all armor (heavy,
medium, and light) and shields. Note that armor check penalties for
armor heavier than leather apply to the skills Balance, Climb, Escape
Artist, Hide, Jump, Move Silently, Pick Pocket, and Tumble. Also,
Swim checks suffer a –1 penalty for every 5 pounds of armor and
equipment carried.
Bonus Feats: At 1st level, the fighter gets a bonus feat in addition
to the feat that any 1st-level character gets and the bonus feat
granted to humans. The fighter gains an additional bonus feat at 2nd
level and every two levels thereafter (4th, 6th, 8th, etc.). These bonus
feats must be drawn from the following list: Ambidexterity, BlindFight, Combat Reflexes, Dodge (Mobility, Spring Attack), Exotic
Weapon Proficiency*, Expertise (Improved Disarm, Improved Trip,
Whirlwind Attack), Improved Critical*, Improved Initiative,
Improved Unarmed Strike (Deflect Arrows, Stunning Fist),
Mounted Combat (Mounted Archery, Trample, Ride-By Attack,
Spirited Charge), Point Blank Shot (Far Shot, Precise Shot, Rapid
Shot, Shot on the Run), Power Attack (Cleave, Improved Bull Rush,
Sunder, Great Cleave), Quick Draw, Two-Weapon Fighting
(Improved Two-Weapon Fighting), Weapon Finesse*, Weapon
Focus*, Weapon Specialization*.
Some of the bonus feats available to a fighter cannot be acquired
until the fighter has gained one or more prerequisite feats; these
feats are listed parenthetically after the prerequisite feat. A fighter
can select feats marked with an asterisk (*) more than once, but it
must be for a different weapon each time. A fighter must still meet
all prerequisites for a feat, including ability score and base attack
bonus minimums. (See Chapter 5: Feats for descriptions of feats and
their prerequisites.)
Important: These feats are in addition to the feat that a character of
any class gets every three levels (as per Table 3–2: Experience and
Level-Dependent Benefits). The fighter is not limited to the list
given here when choosing those feats.
Weapon Specialization: On achieving 4th level or higher, as a
feat the fighter (and only the fighter) may take Weapon
Specialization. Weapon Specialization adds a +2 damage bonus with
a chosen weapon. The fighter must have Weapon Focus with that
weapon to take Weapon Specialization. If the weapon is a ranged
weapon, the damage bonus only applies if the target is within 30
feet, because only at that range can the fighter strike precisely
enough to hit more effectively. The fighter may take this feat as a
bonus feat or as a regular one.

Monk
Dotted across the landscape are monasteries—small, walled cloisters
inhabited by monks. These monks pursue personal perfection
through action as well as contemplation. They train themselves to be
versatile warriors skilled at fighting without weapons or armor.
Monasteries headed by good masters serve as protectors of the
people. Ready for battle even when barefoot and dressed in peasant
clothes, monks are able to travel unnoticed among the populace,
catching bandits, warlords, and corrupt nobles unawares. By
contrast, monasteries headed by evil masters rule surrounding lands
through fear, as an evil warlord’s castle might. Evil monks make
ideal spies, infiltrators, and assassins.
The individual monk, however, is unlikely to care passionately
about championing commoners or amassing wealth. She cares for
the perfection of her art and, thereby, her personal perfection. Her
goal is to achieve a state that is, frankly, beyond the mortal realm.
Adventures: Monks approach adventures as if they were
personal tests. While not prone to showing off, monks are willing to
try their skills against whatever obstacles confront them. Monks are
not greedy for material wealth, but they eagerly seek that which can
help them perfect their art.
Characteristics: The key feature of the monk is her ability to
fight unarmed and unarmored. Thanks to her rigorous training, she
can strike as hard as if she were armed and strike faster than a
warrior with a sword.
Though monks don’t cast spells, they have a magic of their own.
They channel a subtle energy, called ki, which allows them to
perform amazing feats. The monk’s best-known feat is her ability to
stun an opponent with an unarmed blow. A monk also has a
preternatural awareness of attacks. She can dodge an attack even if
she is not consciously aware of it.
As the monk gains experience and power, her mundane and kioriented abilities grow, giving her more and more power over
herself and, sometimes, over others.
Alignment: A monk’s training requires strict discipline. Only
those who are lawful at heart are capable of undertaking it.
Religion: A monk’s training is her spiritual path. She is innerdirected, capable of a private, mystic connection to the spiritual
world. She needs neither clerics nor gods. Certain lawful gods,
however, may appeal to monks, and monks may meditate on the
gods’ likenesses and attempt to emulate their deeds. The three most
likely candidates for a monk’s devotion are Heironeous, god of valor;
St. Cuthbert, god of retribution; and Hextor, god of tyranny.
Background: A monk typically trains in a monastery. Most
monks were children when they joined the monastery, sent to live
with the monks when their parents died, when there wasn’t enough
food in the family to keep them, or in return for some kindness that
the monastery had performed for the family. Life in the monastery
is so focused that by the time a monk sets off on her own, she feels
little connection to her former family or village.
In larger cities, master monks have set up monk schools to teach
their arts to those who are interested and worthy. The monks of
these academies often see their rural cousins from the monasteries
as backward.
A monk may feel a deep connection to her monastery or school,
to the monk who taught her, to the lineage into which she was
trained, or to all of these. Some monks, however, have no sense of
connection other than to their own paths of personal development.
Monks recognize each other as a select group set apart from the
rest of the populace. They may feel kinship, but they also love to
compete with each other to see whose ki is strongest.
Races: Monasteries are mostly found among humans, who have
incorporated them into their ever-evolving culture. Thus, many
monks are humans (or half-orcs and half-elves who live among
humans). Elves are capable of single-minded, long-term devotion to
an interest, art, or discipline, and some of them leave the forests to
become monks. The monk tradition is alien to dwarven and gnome
culture, and halflings are typically too mobile to commit themselves
to a monastery, so dwarves, gnomes, and halflings are very rarely
monks.
The savage humanoids do not have the stable social structure that
allows monk training, but the occasional orphaned or abandoned
child from some humanoid tribe winds up in civilized monasteries
or adopted by a wandering master. The evil subterranean elves
known as the drow have a small but successful monk tradition.
Other Classes: Monks are sometimes distant from others
because they have little in common with the motivations and skills
of members of other classes. Monks recognize, however, that they
work well with the support of others, and they prove themselves
reliable companions.
GAME RULE INFORMATION
Monks have the following game statistics.
Abilities: Wisdom powers the monk’s special offensive and
defensive capabilities. Dexterity provides the unarmored monk with
a better defense and with bonuses to some class skills. Strength
helps a monk’s unarmed combat ability.
Alignment: Any lawful.
Hit Die: d8.
Class Skills
The monk’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are Balance
(Dex), Climb (Str), Concentration (Con), Craft (Int), Diplomacy
(Cha), Escape Artist (Dex), Hide (Dex), Jump (Str), Knowledge
(arcana) (Int), Listen (Wis), Move Silently (Dex), Perform (Cha),
Profession (Wis), Swim (Str), and Tumble (Dex). See Chapter 4:
Skills for skill descriptions.
Skill Points at 1st Level: (4 + Int modifier) x 4.
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 4 + Int modifier.
Class Features
All of the following are class features of the
monk.
Weapon and Armor Proficiency:
Monks are
proficient with
basic peasant
weapons and special
weapons whose use
is part of monk
training. The full list
includes club, crossbow
(light or heavy), dagger,
handaxe, javelin, kama,
nunchaku, quarterstaff,
shuriken, siangham, and
sling. (See Chapter 7:
Equipment for descriptions
of these weapons.)
A monk using a kama,
nunchaku, or siangham can
strike with her unarmed base
attack, including her more
favorable number of attacks per
round (see below). Her damage,
however, is standard for the
weapon (1d6, crit x2), not her
unarmed damage. The weapon
must be light, so a Small monk
must use Tiny versions of
these weapons in order to use
the more favorable base attack.
Monks are not proficient
with armor or shields, but they are
highly trained at dodging blows,
and they develop a “sixth sense”
that lets them avoid even
unanticipated attacks. A monk adds
her Wisdom bonus (if any) to AC, in addition
to her normal Dexterity modifier, and her AC
improves as she gains levels. (Only add this
extra AC bonus if the total of the monk’s
Wisdom modifier and the number in the “AC Bonus” column on
Table 3–10 is a positive number.) The Wisdom bonus and the AC
bonus represent a preternatural awareness of danger, and a monk
does not lose either even in situations when she loses her Dexterity
modifier due to being unprepared, ambushed, stunned, and so on.
(Monks do lose these AC bonuses when immobilized.)
A monk’s special skills all require freedom of movement. When
wearing armor, a monk loses her AC bonus for Wisdom, AC bonus
for class and level, favorable multiple unarmed attacks per round,
and heightened movement. Furthermore, her special abilities all
face the arcane spell failure chance that the armor type normally
imposes. In addition, wearing armor heavier than leather imposes
check penalties to the skills Balance, Climb, Escape Artist, Hide,
Jump, Move Silently, Pick Pocket, and Tumble. Also, Swim checks
suffer a –1 penalty for every 5 pounds of armor or equipment
carried.
Unarmed Strike: Monks are highly trained in fighting unarmed,
giving them considerable advantages when doing so. They deal
more damage than normal, as shown on Table 3–10: The Monk. A
monk fighting unarmed gains the benefits of the Improved
Unarmed Strike feat and thus does not provoke attacks of
opportunity from armed opponents that she attacks.
A monk’s attacks may be with either fist interchangeably or even
from elbows, knees, and feet. There is no such thing as an off-hand
attack for a monk striking unarmed.
A monk fighting with a one-handed weapon can make an
unarmed strike as an off-hand attack, but she suffers the
standard penalties for two-weapon fighting (see Table 8–2: TwoWeapon Fighting Penalties, page 125). Likewise, a monk with a
weapon (other than a special monk weapon) in her off hand
gets an extra attack with that weapon but suffers the usual
penalties for two-weapon fighting and can’t strike with a
flurry of blows (see below).
The unarmed damage on Table 3–10: The Monk is for
Medium-size monks. Small monks deal less than
stated damage with unarmed attacks (see Table 3–11:
Small Monk Damage and Speed).
Flurry of Blows: The monk may strike with a flurry
of blows at the expense of accuracy. When doing
so, she may make one extra attack in a round at her
highest base attack, but this attack and each other
attack made that round suffer a –2 penalty apiece. For
example, at 6th level, Ember gets two unarmed
attacks at +7 and +4. If she executes a flurry of
blows, she gets three attacks at +5, +5, and +2.
This penalty applies for 1 round, so it affects
attacks of opportunity the monk might
make before her next action. The
monk must use the full attack action
(see page 124) to strike with a flurry
of blows. A monk may also use the flurry of blows if
armed with a special monk weapon (kama, nunchaku,
or siangham). If armed with one such weapon, she
makes the extra attack either with that weapon or
unarmed. If armed with two such weapons, she uses
one for the regular attack (or attacks) and the other for
the extra attack. In any case, her damage bonus on the
attack with her off hand is not reduced.
Usually, a monk’s unarmed strikes deal normal
damage, but she can choose to deal subdual damage
instead with no penalty on her attack roll. She has
the same choice to deal normal or subdual
damage while grappling (see Grapple, page
137).
TABLE 3–11: SMALL MONK DAMAGE AND SPEED
Level Damage Speed Level Damage Speed
1–2 1d4 20 ft. 9–11 1d8 40 ft.
3 1d4 25 ft. 12–14 1d10 45 ft.
4–5 1d6 25 ft. 15 1d10 55 ft.
6–7 1d6 35 ft. 16–17 2d6 55 ft.
8 1d8 35 ft. 18–20 2d6 60 ft.
Stunning Attack: A monk has the ability to stun a creature
damaged by her unarmed attacks. The monk can use this
supernatural ability once per round, but no more than once per level
per day. The monk must declare she is using a stun attack before
making the attack roll (thus, a missed attack roll ruins the attempt).
A foe struck by the monk is forced to make a Fortitude saving throw
(DC 10 + one-half the monk’s level + Wisdom modifier), in addition
to receiving normal damage. If the saving throw fails, the opponent
is stunned for 1 round. A stunned character can’t act and loses any
Dexterity bonus to AC, while attackers get a +2 bonus on attack rolls
against a stunned opponent. Constructs, oozes, plants, undead,
incorporeal creatures, and creatures immune to critical hits cannot
be stunned by the monk’s stunning attack.
Evasion: A monk can avoid even magical and unusual attacks
with great agility. If a monk makes a successful Reflex saving throw
against an attack that normally deals half damage on a successful
save (such as a red dragon’s fiery breath or a fireball), the monk
instead takes no damage. Evasion can only be used if the monk is
wearing light armor or no armor. It is an extraordinary ability.
Deflect Arrows: At 2nd level, a monk gains the Deflect Arrows
feat (see page 81), even if she doesn’t have the prerequisite Dexterity
score.
Fast Movement: At 3rd level and higher, a monk moves faster
than normal, as shown on Table 3–10: The Monk. A monk in armor
(even light armor) or carrying a medium or heavy load loses this
extra speed. A dwarf or a Small monk moves more slowly than a
Medium-size monk (see Table 3–11: Small Monk Damage and
Speed).
From 9th level on, the monk’s running ability is actually a
supernatural ability.
Still Mind: At 3rd level, a monk gains a +2 bonus to saving
throws against spells and effects from the Enchantment school,
since her meditation and training enable her to better resist mindaffecting attacks.
Slow Fall: At 4th level, a monk within arm’s reach of a wall can
use the wall to slow her descent. The monk takes damage as if the
fall were 20 feet shorter than it actually is. Her ability to slow her fall
(that is, to reduce the effective height of the fall when next to a wall)
improves with her level until, at 18th level, the monk can use a
nearby wall to slow her descent and fall any distance without harm.
See the “Special” column on Table 3–10 for details.
Purity of Body: At 5th level, a monk gains control over her
body’s immune system. She gains immunity to all diseases except
for magical diseases such as mummy rot and lycanthropy.
Improved Trip: At 6th level, a monk gains the Improved Trip
feat (see page 83). She need not have taken the Expertise feat,
normally a prerequisite, before this.
Wholeness of Body: At 7th level, a monk can cure her own
wounds. She can cure up to twice her current level in hit points each
day, and she can spread this healing out among several uses.
Wholeness of body is a supernatural ability.
Leap of the Clouds: At 7th level or higher, a monk’s jumping
distance (vertical or horizontal) is not limited according to her
height. (See the Jump skill description, page 70.)
Improved Evasion: At 9th level, a monk’s evasion ability
improves. She still takes no damage on a successful Reflex saving
throw against attacks such as a dragon’s breath weapon or a fireball,
but henceforth she only takes half damage on a failed save.
Ki Strike: At 10th level, a monk’s unarmed attack is empowered
with ki. The unarmed strike damage from such an attack can deal
damage to a creature with damage reduction, such as a wight, as if
the blow were made with a weapon with a +1 enhancement bonus.
Ki strike improves as the monk gains experience, allowing her
unarmed strike at 13th level to deal damage against creatures with
damage reduction as if it were made with a weapon with a +2
enhancement bonus, and at 16th level to deal damage against
creatures with damage reduction as if it were made with a weapon
with a +3 enhancement bonus. Ki strike is a supernatural ability.
Diamond Body: At 11th level, a monk is in such control of her
own metabolism that she gains immunity to poison of all kinds.
Diamond body is a supernatural ability.
Abundant Step: At 12th level, a monk can slip magically
between spaces, as per the spell dimension door, once per day. This is a
spell-like ability, and the monk’s effective casting level is one-half
her actual level (rounded down).
Diamond Soul: At 13th level, a monk gains spell resistance. Her
spell resistance equals her level + 10. In order to affect the monk
with a spell, a spellcaster must roll the monk’s spell resistance or
higher on 1d20 + the spellcaster’s level. (See Spell Resistance, page
150.)
Quivering Palm: Starting at 15th level, a monk can use the
quivering palm. This supernatural ability allows the monk to set up
vibrations within the body of another creature that can then be fatal
if the monk so desires.
The monk can use the quivering palm attack once a week, and she
must announce her intent before making her attack roll. Constructs,
oozes, plants, undead, incorporeal creatures, and creatures immune
to critical hits cannot be affected. The monk must be of higher level
than the target (or have more levels than the target’s number of Hit
Dice). If the monk strikes successfully and the target takes damage
from the blow, the quivering palm attack succeeds. Thereafter the
monk can choose to try to slay the victim at any later time within
one day per level of the monk. The monk merely wills the target to
die (a free action), and unless the target makes a Fortitude saving
throw (DC 10 + one-half the monk’s level + Wisdom modifier), it
dies. If the saving throw is successful, the target is no longer in
danger from that particular quivering palm attack (but may be
affected by another one at a later time).
Timeless Body: After achieving 17th level, a monk no longer
suffers ability penalties for aging and cannot be magically aged. (Any
penalties she may have already suffered remain in place.) Bonuses
still accrue, and the monk still dies of old age when her time is up.
Tongue of the Sun and Moon: A monk of 17th level or above
can speak with any living creature.
Empty Body: At 19th level or higher, a monk can assume an
ethereal state for 1 round per level per day, as per the spell
etherealness. The monk may go ethereal on a number of different
occasions during any single day as long as the total number of
rounds spent ethereal does not exceed her level. Empty body is a
supernatural ability.
Perfect Self: At 20th level, a monk has tuned her body with skill
and quasi-magical abilities to the point that she becomes a magical
creature. She is forevermore treated as an outsider (extraplanar
creature) rather than as a humanoid. For instance, charm person does
not affect her. Additionally, the monk gains damage reduction
20/+1. This means that the monk ignores (instantly regenerates) the
first 20 points of damage from any attack unless the damage is dealt
by a weapon with a +1 enhancement bonus (or better), by a spell, or
by a form of energy (fire, cold, etc.). As an outsider, a 20th-level
monk is subject to spells that repel enchanted creatures, such as
protection from law. Unlike other outsiders, the monk can still be
brought back from the dead.
Ex8Monks
A monk who becomes nonlawful cannot gain new levels as a monk
but retains all monk abilities.
Like a member of any other class, a monk may be a multiclass
character, but monks face a special restriction. A monk who gains a
new class or (if already multiclass) raises another class by a level may
never again raise her monk level, though she retains all her monk
abilities.

Paladin
The compassion to pursue good, the
will to uphold law, and the power to
defeat evil—these are the three
weapons of the paladin. Few have the
purity and devotion that it takes to
walk the paladin’s path, but those few
are rewarded with the power to
protect, to heal, and to smite. In a land
of scheming wizards, unholy priests,
bloodthirsty dragons, and infernal
fiends, the paladin is the final hope
that cannot be extinguished.
Adventures: Paladins take their
adventures seriously and have a
penchant for referring to them as
“quests.” Even a mundane mission is,
in the heart of the paladin, a personal
test—an opportunity to demonstrate
bravery, to develop martial skills, to learn tactics, and to
find ways to do good. Still, the paladin really comes into her own
when leading a mighty campaign against evil, not when merely
looting ruins.
Characteristics: Divine power protects the paladin and gives her
special powers. It wards off harm, protects her from disease, lets her
heal herself, and guards her heart against fear. The paladin can also
direct this power to help others, healing their wounds or curing
diseases. Finally, the paladin can use this power to destroy evil. Even
the least experienced paladin can detect evil, and more experienced
paladins can smite evil foes and turn away undead. In addition, this
power draws a mighty steed to the paladin and imbues that mount
with strength, intelligence, and magical protection.
Alignment: Paladins must be lawful good, and they lose their
divine powers if they deviate from that alignment. Additionally,
paladins swear to follow a code of conduct that is in line with
lawfulness and goodness.
Religion: Paladins need not devote themselves to a single deity.
Devotion to righteousness is enough for most. Those who align
themselves with particular religions prefer Heironeous, god of valor,
over all others, but some paladins follow Pelor, the sun god. Paladins
devoted to a god are scrupulous in observing religious duties and are
welcome in every associated temple.
Background: No one ever chooses to be a paladin.
Becoming a paladin is answering a call, accepting
one’s destiny. No one, no matter how diligent, can
become a paladin through practice. The nature is
either within one or not, and it is not possible to gain
the paladin’s nature by any act of will. It is possible to
fail to recognize one’s own potential, or to deny
one’s destiny. Some who are called to be paladins
deny the call and pursue some other life
instead.
Most paladins answer the call and begin
training as adolescents. Typically, they
become squires or assistants to
experienced paladins, train for years,
and finally set off on their own to
further the causes of good and law.
Other paladins, however, find their
calling only later in life, after having
pursued some other career. All paladins,
regardless of background, recognize in
each other an eternal bond that
transcends culture, race, and even
religion. Any two paladins, even from
opposite sides of the world, consider
themselves comrades.
Races: Humans, with their ambitious
souls, make great paladins. Half-elves, who
often have human ambition, may also find
themselves called into service as paladins.
Dwarves are sometimes paladins, but
becoming a paladin may be hard
on a dwarf because it means
putting the duties of the
paladin’s life before duties
to family, clan, and
king. Elven paladins are
few, and those few tend
to follow quests that take
them far and wide
because their lawful
bent puts them out of
synch with life among the
elves. Members of the other
common races rarely hear the call
to become paladins.
Among the savage
humanoids, paladins are all but unheard of.
Other Classes: Even though paladins are in some ways set apart
from others, they eagerly team up with those whose skills and
capabilities complement their own. They work well with good and
lawful clerics, and they appreciate working with those who are
brave, honest, and committed to good. While they cannot abide evil
acts by their companions, they are otherwise willing to work with a
variety of people quite different from themselves. Charismatic,
trustworthy, and well respected, the paladin makes a fine leader for a
team.
GAME RULE INFORMATION
Paladins have the following game statistics.
Abilities: Charisma increases the paladin’s healing, selfprotective capabilities, and undead turning. Strength is important 
for a paladin because of its role in combat. A Wisdom score of 14 or
higher is required to get access to the most powerful paladin spells,
and a score of 11 or higher is required to cast any paladin spells at all.
Alignment: Lawful good.
Hit Die: d10.
Class Skills
The paladin’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are
Concentration (Con), Craft (Int), Diplomacy (Cha), Handle Animal
(Cha), Heal (Wis), Knowledge (religion) (Int), Profession (Wis), and
Ride (Dex). See Chapter 4: Skills for skill descriptions.
Skill Points at 1st Level: (2 + Int modifier) x 4.
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 2 + Int modifier.
Class Features
All of the following are class features of the paladin.
Weapon and Armor Proficiency: Paladins are proficient with
all simple and martial weapons, with all types of armor (heavy,
medium, and light), and with shields. Note that armor check
penalties for armor heavier than leather apply to the skills Balance,
Climb, Escape Artist, Hide, Jump, Move Silently, Pick Pocket, and
Tumble. Also, Swim checks suffer a –1 penalty for every 5 pounds of
armor and equipment carried.
Detect Evil: At will, the paladin can detect evil as a spell-like
ability. This ability duplicates the effects of the spell detect evil.
Divine Grace: A paladin applies her Charisma modifier (if
positive) as a bonus to all saving throws.
Lay on Hands: A paladin can heal wounds by touch. Each day
she can cure a total number of hit points equal to her Charisma
bonus (if any) times her level. For example, a 7th-level paladin with a
16 Charisma (+3 bonus) may cure up to 21 points of damage. The
paladin can cure herself. She may choose to divide her curing
among multiple recipients, and she doesn’t have to use it all at once.
Lay on hands is a spell-like ability whose use is a standard action.
Alternatively, the paladin can use any or all of these points to deal
damage to undead creatures. Treat this attack just like a touch spell.
The paladin decides how many cure points to use as damage after
successfully touching the undead creature.
Divine Health: A paladin is immune to all diseases, including
magical diseases such as mummy rot and lycanthropy.
Aura of Courage: Beginning at 2nd level, a paladin is immune to
fear (magical or otherwise). Allies within 10 feet of the paladin gain
a +4 morale bonus on saving throws against fear effects. Granting
the morale bonus to allies is a supernatural ability.
Smite Evil: Once per day, a paladin of 2nd level or higher may
attempt to smite evil with one normal melee attack. She adds her
Charisma modifier (if positive) to her attack roll and deals 1 extra
point of damage per level. For example, a 13th-level paladin armed
with a longsword would deal 1d8+13 points of damage, plus any
additional bonuses for high Strength or magical effects that
normally apply. If the paladin accidentally smites a creature that is
not evil, the smite has no effect but it is still used up for that day.
Smite evil is a supernatural ability.
Remove Disease: Beginning at 3rd level, a paladin can remove
disease, as per the spell remove disease, once per week. She can use this
ability more often as she advances in levels (twice per week at 6th
level, three times per week at 9th level, and so forth). Remove disease
is a spell-like ability for paladins.
Turn Undead: When a paladin reaches 3rd level, she gains the
supernatural ability to turn undead. She may use this ability a
number of times per day equal to three plus her Charisma modifier.
She turns undead as a cleric of two levels lower would. (See Turn
and Rebuke Undead, page 139.)
Extra Turning: As a feat, a paladin may take Extra Turning. This
feat allows the paladin to turn undead four more times per day than
normal. A paladin can take this feat multiple times, gaining four
extra daily turning attempts each time.
Spells: Beginning at 4th level, a paladin gains the ability to cast a
small number of divine spells. To cast a spell, the paladin must have
a Wisdom score of at least 10 + the spell’s level, so a paladin with a
Wisdom of 10 or lower cannot cast these spells. Paladin bonus spells
are based on Wisdom, and saving throws against these spells have a
Difficulty Class of 10 + spell level + Wisdom modifier. When the
paladin gets 0 spells of a given level, such as 0 1st-level spells at 4th
level, the paladin gets only bonus spells (as per Table 1–1: Ability
Modifiers and Bonus Spells). A paladin without a bonus spell for
that level cannot yet cast a spell of that level. The paladin’s spell list
appears on page 167. A paladin has access to any spell on the list and
can freely choose which to prepare, just as a cleric can. A paladin
prepares and casts spells just as a cleric does (though the paladin
cannot use spontaneous casting to substitute a cure spell in place of a
prepared spell).
Through 3rd level, a paladin has no caster level. Starting at 4th
level, a paladin’s caster level is one-half her class level.
Special Mount: Upon or after reaching 5th level, a paladin can
call an unusually intelligent, strong, and loyal steed to serve her in
her crusade against evil (see The Paladin’s Mount sidebar). This
mount is usually a heavy warhorse (for a Medium-size paladin) or a
warpony (for a Small paladin).
Should the paladin’s mount die, she may call for another one after
a year and a day. The new mount has all the accumulated abilities
due a mount of the paladin’s level.
Code of Conduct: A paladin must be of lawful good alignment
and loses all special class abilities if she ever willingly commits an
act of evil. Additionally, a paladin’s code requires that she respect
legitimate authority, act with honor (not lying, not cheating, not
using poison, etc.), help those who need help (provided they do not
use the help for evil or chaotic ends), and punish those that harm or
threaten innocents.
Associates: While she may adventure with characters of any
good or neutral alignment, a paladin will never knowingly associate
with evil characters. A paladin will not continue an association with
someone who consistently offends her moral code. A paladin may
only hire henchmen or accept followers who are lawful good.
Ex8Paladins
A paladin who ceases to be lawful good, who willfully commits an
evil act, or who grossly violates the code of conduct loses all special
abilities and spells, including the service of the paladin’s warhorse.
She also may not progress in levels as a paladin. She regains her
abilities if she atones for her violations (see the atonement spell
description, page 176), as appropriate.
Like a member of any other class, a paladin may be a multiclass
character, but paladins face a special restriction. A paladin who gains
a new class or (if already multiclass) raises another class by a level
may never again raise her paladin level, though she retains all her
paladin abilities. The path of the paladin requires a constant heart.
Once you undertake the path, you must pursue it to the exclusion of
all other careers. Once you have turned off the path, you may never
return.

THE PALADINíS MOUNT
The paladin’s mount is different from a standard animal of its type in
many ways. The standard mount for a Medium-size paladin is a
warhorse, and the standard mount for a Small paladin is a warpony (see
the Monster Manual for warhorse and warpony basic statistics). Your DM
may work with you to select another kind of mount, such as a riding dog.
A paladin’s mount is a magical beast, not an animal. It is superior to a
normal mount of its kind and has special powers, as shown below:
Paladin Bonus Natural Str
Level HD Armor Adj. Int Special
5–7 +2 4 +1 6 Improved evasion, share
spells, empathic link, share
saving throws
8–10 +4 6 +2 7
11–14 +6 8 +3 8 Command creatures of its kind
15–20 +8 10 +4 9 Spell resistance
Paladin Level: The level of the paladin. If the mount suffers a level
drain, treat it as a mount of a lower-level paladin.
Bonus HD: These are extra eight-sided (d8) Hit Dice, each of which
gains a Constitution modifier, as normal. Remember that extra Hit Dice
improve the mount’s base attack and base save bonuses.
Natural Armor: The number listed here is an improvement to the
mount’s AC. It represents the preternatural toughness of a paladin’s
mount.
Str Adj.: Add this figure to the mount’s Strength score.
Int: The mount’s Intelligence score.
Improved Evasion: If the mount is subjected to an attack that
normally allows a Reflex saving throw for half damage, it takes no
damage if it makes a successful saving throw and half damage even if
the saving throw fails. Improved evasion is an extraordinary ability.
Share Spells: At the paladin’s option, she may have any spell she
casts on herself also affect her mount. The mount must be within 5 feet.
If the spell has a duration other than instantaneous, the spell stops
affecting the mount if it moves farther than 5 feet away and will not
affect the mount again even if the mount returns to the paladin before
the duration expires. Additionally, the paladin may cast a spell with a
target of “You” on her mount (as a touch range spell) instead of on
herself. The paladin and the mount can share spells even if the spells
normally do not affect creatures of the mount’s type (magical beast).
Empathic Link: The paladin has an empathic link with the mount out
to a distance of up to one mile. The paladin cannot see through the
mount’s eyes, but they can communicate telepathically. Even intelligent
mounts see the world differently from humans, so misunderstandings are
always possible. This is a supernatural ability.
Because of the empathic link between the mount and the paladin, the
paladin has the same connection to an item or place that the mount
does, just as a master and his familiar (see Familiars, page 51).
Share Saving Throws: The mount uses its own base save or the
paladin’s, whichever is higher.
Command: The mount’s command ability is a spell-like ability that it
can use at will against other creatures of its kind (for warhorses and
warponies, this includes donkeys, mules, and ponies) with fewer Hit Dice
than it has itself. The mount can use this ability once per day per two
levels of its paladin, and the ability functions just like the spell command
(for purposes of this spell, the mount can make itself be understood by
any normal animal of its kind). Since this is a spell-like ability, the mount
must make a Concentration check (DC 21) if it’s being ridden at the time
(as in combat). If the check fails, the ability does not work that time, but
it still counts against the mount’s daily uses.
Spell Resistance: The mount’s spell resistance equals the paladin’s
level + 5. To affect the mount with a spell, a spellcaster must make a
caster level check (1d20 + caster level) at least equal to the mount’s
spell resistance.

Ranger
The forests are home to fierce and
cunning creatures, such as
bloodthirsty owlbears and
malicious displacer beasts. But more
cunning and powerful than these
monsters is the ranger, a skilled hunter
and stalker. He knows the woods as if
they were his home (as indeed they are),
and he knows his prey in deadly detail.
Adventures: Rangers often accept
the role of protector, aiding those
who live in or travel through the
woods. In addition, they often carry
grudges against certain types of
creatures and look for opportunities to
find and destroy them. Additionally, rangers may adventure for all
the reasons that fighters do.
Characteristics: The ranger is proficient with all simple and
martial weapons and capable in combat. His skills allow him to
survive in the wilderness, to find his prey,
and to avoid detection. He also has special
knowledge of certain types of creatures.
This knowledge makes him more capable of
finding and defeating those foes. Finally, an
experienced ranger has such a tie to nature that
he can actually draw on natural power to cast
divine spells, much as a druid does.
An experienced ranger often has one or more
animal companions to aid him, thanks to his animal
friendship spell.
Alignment: Rangers can be of any alignment.
Most are good, and they are protectors of the
wild areas. In this role, a ranger seeks out and
destroys or drives off evil creatures that
threaten the wilderness. Good rangers also
protect those who travel through the
wilderness, serving sometimes as guides and
sometimes as unseen guardians. Rangers are
also mostly chaotic, preferring to follow the
ebb and flow of nature or of their own hearts
instead of rigid rules. Evil rangers, though
rare, are much to be feared. They revel in
nature’s thoughtless cruelty and seek to
emulate her most fearsome predators. They
gain divine spells just as good rangers do, for
nature herself is indifferent to good and evil.
Religion: Though rangers gain their divine
spells from the power of nature, like anyone
else they may worship a chosen deity.
Ehlonna, goddess of the woodlands, and ObadHai, god of nature, are the most common
deities among them, though some rangers
prefer more martial deities.
Background: Some rangers gained
their training as part of special military
teams, but most learned their skills from
solitary masters who accepted them as
students and assistants. The rangers of a particular
master may count themselves as cohorts, or they may be rivals for
the status of “best student” and thus the rightful heir to their
master’s fame.
Races: Elves are commonly rangers. They are at home in the
woods, and they have the grace to move stealthily. Half-elves who
feel their elven parents’ connection to the woods are also commonly
rangers. Humans are often rangers as well, being adaptable enough
to learn their way around the woods even if it doesn’t come
naturally. Half-orcs may find the life of a ranger more comfortable
than life among cruel and taunting humans (or orcs). Gnome
rangers are more common than gnome fighters, but still they tend
to remain in their own lands rather than adventure among “the big
people.” Dwarf rangers are rare, but they can be quite effective.
Instead of living in the surface wilderness, they are at home in the
endless caverns beneath the earth. Here they hunt down and
destroy the enemies of dwarvenkind with the relentless precision
for which dwarves are known. Dwarf rangers are often known as
“cavers.” Halfling rangers are legendary—as in, you might hear
stories about them but you’ll probably never meet one.
Among the savage humanoids, only gnolls are commonly rangers,
using their skills to slyly stalk their prey.
Classes: Rangers get along well with druids and to some extent
with barbarians. They are known to bicker with paladins, mostly
because they often share goals but differ in style, tactics, approach,
philosophy, and esthetics. Since rangers don’t much look to other
people for support or friendship, they find it easy to tolerate people
who are quite different from themselves, such as bookish wizards
and preachy clerics. They just don’t care enough to get upset about
others’ differences.
GAME RULE INFORMATION
Rangers have the following game statistics.
Abilities: Dexterity is important for a ranger because rangers
tend to wear light armor and because several ranger skills are based
on Dexterity. Strength is important for them because rangers
frequently get involved in combat. Several ranger skills are based on
Wisdom, and a Wisdom score of 14 or higher is required to get
access to the most powerful ranger spells. A Wisdom score of 11 or
higher is required to cast any ranger spells at all.
Alignment: Any.
Hit Die: d10.
Class Skills
The ranger’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are
Animal Empathy (Cha, exclusive skill), Climb (Str), Concentration
(Con), Craft (Int), Handle Animal (Cha), Heal (Wis), Hide (Dex),
Intuit Direction (Wis), Jump (Str), Knowledge (nature) (Int), Listen
(Wis), Move Silently (Dex), Profession (Wis), Ride (Dex), Search
(Int), Spot (Wis), Swim (Str), Use Rope (Dex), and Wilderness Lore
(Wis). See Chapter 4: Skills for skill descriptions.
Skill Points at 1st Level: (4 + Int modifier) x 4.
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 4 + Int modifier.
Class Features
All of the following are class features of the ranger.
Weapon and Armor Proficiency: A ranger is proficient with all
simple and martial weapons, light armor, medium armor, and
shields. Note that armor check penalties for armor heavier than
leather apply to the skills Balance, Climb, Escape Artist, Hide, Jump,
Move Silently, Pick Pocket, and Tumble. Also, Swim checks suffer a
–1 penalty for every 5 pounds of armor and equipment carried.
When wearing light armor or no armor, a ranger can fight with two
weapons as if he had the feats Ambidexterity and Two-Weapon
Fighting. He loses this special bonus when fighting in medium or
heavy armor, or when using a double weapon (such as a two-bladed
sword).
Spells: Beginning at 4th level, a ranger gains the ability to cast a
small number of divine spells. To cast a spell, the ranger must have a
Wisdom score of at least 10 + the spell’s level, so a ranger with a
Wisdom of 10 or lower cannot cast these spells. Ranger bonus spells
are based on Wisdom, and saving throws against these spells have a
Difficulty Class of 10 + spell level + Wisdom modifier. When the
ranger gets 0 spells of a given level, such as 0 1st-level spells at 4th
level, the ranger gets only bonus spells. A ranger without a bonus
spell for that level (see Table 1–1: Ability Modifiers and Spells, page
8) cannot yet cast a spell of that level. The ranger’s spell list appears
on page 167. A ranger has access to any spell on the list and can
freely choose which to prepare. A ranger prepares and casts spells
just as a cleric does (though the ranger cannot use spontaneous
casting to lose a spell and cast a cure spell in its place).
Through 3rd level, a ranger has no caster level. Starting at 4th
level, a ranger’s caster level is one-half his class level.
Track: A ranger gains Track (see page 85) as a bonus feat.
Favored Enemy: At 1st level, a ranger may select a type of
creature (dragons, giants, goblinoids, undead, etc.) as a favored
enemy. (A ranger can only select his own race as a favored enemy if
he is evil.) Due to his extensive study of his foes and training in the
proper techniques for combating them, the ranger gains a +1 bonus
to Bluff, Listen, Sense Motive, Spot, and Wilderness Lore checks
when using these skills against this type of creature. Likewise, he
gets the same bonus to weapon damage rolls against creatures of this
type. A ranger also gets the damage bonus with ranged weapons, but
only against targets within 30 feet (the ranger cannot strike with
deadly accuracy beyond that range). The bonus doesn’t apply to
damage against creatures that are immune to critical hits.
At 5th level and at every five levels thereafter (10th, 15th, and
20th level), the ranger may select a new favored enemy, and the
bonus associated with every previously selected favored enemy goes
up by +1. For example, a 15th-level ranger will have four favored
enemies, with bonuses of +4, +3, +2, and +1.
Table 3–14: Ranger Favored Enemies lists possible categories for a
ranger’s favored enemy.
TABLE 3—14: RANGER FAVORED ENEMIES
Type Examples
Aberrations Beholders
Animals Bears
Beasts Owlbears
Constructs Golems
Dragons Black dragons
Elementals Xorns
Fey Dryads
Giants Ogres
Humanoid type *
Magical beasts Displacer beasts
Oozes Gelatinous cubes
Outsider type *
Plants Shambling mounds
Shapechangers Werewolves
Undead Zombies
Vermin Giant spiders
*Rangers may not select “humanoid” or “outsider” as a favored enemy,
but they may select a more narrowly defined type of humanoid (such as
goblinoids, humans, or reptilian humanoids) or outsider (such as devils,
efreet, or slaadi). See the Monster Manual for more information on
types of creatures. A ranger can only select his own race as a favored
enemy if he is evil.
Improved Two-Weapon Fighting: A ranger with a base attack
bonus of at least +9 can choose to gain the Improved Two-Weapon
Fighting feat (see page 83) even if he does not have the other
prerequisites for the feat. The ranger must be wearing light armor or
no armor in order to use this benefit.

Rogue
Rogues share little in common with each other. Some are stealthy
thieves. Others are silver-tongued tricksters. Still others are scouts,
infiltrators, spies, diplomats, or thugs. What they share is versatility,
adaptability, and resourcefulness. In general, rogues are skilled at
getting what others don’t want them to get: entrance into a locked
treasure vault, safe passage past a deadly trap, secret battle plans, a
guard’s trust, or some random person’s pocket money.
Adventures: Rogues adventure for the same reason they do most
things: to get what they can get. Some are after loot, others
experience. Some crave fame, others infamy. Quite a few also enjoy a
challenge. Figuring out how to thwart a trap or avoid an alarm is
great fun for many rogues.
Characteristics: Rogues are highly skilled, and they can
concentrate in any of several types of skills. While not equal to
members of many other classes in combat, a rogue knows how to hit
where it hurts, and a rogue who can hit an opponent with a sneak
attack can dish out a lot of damage.
Rogues have a sixth sense when it comes to avoiding danger.
Experienced rogues develop nearly magical powers and skills as
they master the arts of stealth, evasion, and sneak attacks. In
addition, while not capable of casting spells on their own, rogues can
“fake it” well enough to cast spells from scrolls, activate wands, and
use just about any other magic item.
Alignment: Rogues follow opportunity, not ideals. They are
more likely to be chaotic than lawful. Rogues, however, are a diverse
bunch, and they may be of any alignment.
Religion: Rogues most commonly worship Olidammara, god of
thieves, though they are not renowned for their piety. Evil rogues
might secretly worship Nerull, god of death, or Erythnul, god of 
slaughter. Since rogues are a diverse crew, however, many of them
worship other deities, or none at all.
Background: Some rogues are officially inducted into an
organized fellowship of rogues or “guild of thieves.” Most, however,
are self-taught or learned their skills from an independent mentor.
Often, an experienced rogue needs an assistant for scams, secondstory jobs, or just for watching her back. She recruits a likely
youngster who then learns the skills of the trade on the job.
Eventually, the trainee is ready to move on, perhaps because the
mentor has run afoul of the law, or perhaps because the trainee
has double-crossed her mentor and needs some “space.”
Rogues do not see each other as fellows unless they
happen to be members of the same guild or students of
the same mentor. In fact, rogues trust other rogues less
than they trust anyone else. They’re no fools.
Races: Adaptable and often unprincipled, humans take
to the rogue’s life with ease. Halflings, elves, and halfelves, too, find themselves well suited to the demands
of the career. Dwarf and gnome rogues, while less
common, are renowned as experts with
locks and traps. Half-orc rogues
tend toward thuggery.
Rogues are common among
brutal humanoids, especially
goblins and bugbears. Rogues
who learn their arts in savage
lands, however, generally don’t
have experience with complex
mechanisms such as traps and locks.
Other Classes: Rogues love and hate
working with members of
other classes. They excel
when protected by warriors
and supported by
spellcasters. There are plenty
of times, however, that they
wish that everyone else was
as quiet, guileful, and patient as
a rogue. Rogues are
particularly wary of paladins,
either endeavoring to prove
themselves useful or just avoiding
them.
GAME RULE INFORMATION
Rogues have the following game statistics.
Abilities: Dexterity affects many rogue skills and provides the
lightly armored rogue extra protection. Intelligence and Wisdom
are important for many of the rogue’s skills. A high Intelligence
score also gives the rogue extra skill points, which can be used to
expand her repertoire.
Alignment: Any.
Hit Die: d6.
Class Skills
The rogue’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are
Appraise (Int), Balance (Dex), Bluff (Cha), Climb (Str), Craft (Int),
Decipher Script (Int, exclusive skill), Diplomacy (Cha), Disable
Device (Int), Disguise (Cha), Escape Artist (Dex), Forgery (Int),
Gather Information (Cha), Hide (Dex), Innuendo (Wis), Intimidate
(Cha), Intuit Direction (Wis), Jump (Str), Listen (Wis), Move
Silently (Dex), Open Lock (Dex), Perform (Cha), Pick Pocket (Dex),
Profession (Wis), Read Lips (Int, exclusive skill), Search (Int), Sense
Motive (Wis), Spot (Wis), Swim (Str), Tumble (Dex), Use Magic
Device (Cha, exclusive skill), and Use Rope (Dex). See Chapter 4:
Skills for skill descriptions.
Skill Points at 1st Level: (8 + Int modifier) x 4.
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 8 + Int modifier.
Class Features
All of the following are class features of the rogue.
Weapon and Armor Proficiency: A rogue’s weapon training
focuses on weapons suitable for stealth and sneak attacks. Thus, all
rogues are proficient with the crossbow
(hand or light), dagger (any type), dart,
light mace, sap, shortbow (normal and
composite), and short sword. Mediumsize rogues are also proficient with
certain weapons that are too big for
Small rogues to use and conceal easily:
club, heavy crossbow, heavy mace,
morningstar, quarterstaff, and rapier.
Rogues are proficient with light armor
but not with shields. Note that armor
check penalties for armor heavier
than leather apply to the
skills Balance, Climb,
Escape Artist, Hide, Jump,
Move Silently, Pick Pocket,
and Tumble. Also, Swim
checks suffer a –1 penalty
for every 5 pounds of
armor, equipment, or loot
carried.
Sneak Attack: If a rogue can
catch an opponent when he is
unable to defend himself
effectively from her attack, she
can strike a vital spot for extra
damage. Basically, any time
the rogue’s target would be
denied his Dexterity bonus to
AC (whether he actually has a
Dexterity bonus or not), or
when the rogue flanks
the target, the rogue’s
attack deals extra damage. The
extra damage is +1d6 at 1st level and an
additional 1d6 every two levels thereafter.
Should the rogue score a critical hit with a sneak
attack, this extra damage is not multiplied. (See Table 8–
8: Attack Roll Modifiers, page 132, for combat situations in which
the rogue flanks an opponent or the opponent loses his Dexterity
bonus to AC.)
Ranged attacks can only count as sneak attacks if the target is
within 30 feet. The rogue can’t strike with deadly accuracy from
beyond that range.
With a sap (blackjack) or an unarmed strike, the rogue can make a
sneak attack that deals subdual damage instead of normal damage.
She cannot use a weapon that deals normal damage to deal subdual
damage in a sneak attack, not even with the usual –4 penalty,
because she must make optimal use of her weapon in order to
execute a sneak attack. (See Subdual Damage, page 134.)
A rogue can only sneak attack a living creature with a discernible
anatomy—undead, constructs, oozes, plants, and incorporeal
creatures lack vital areas to attack. Any creature that is immune to
critical hits is also not vulnerable to sneak attacks. The rogue must
be able to see the target well enough to pick out a vital spot and must
be able to reach a vital spot. The rogue cannot sneak attack while
striking a creature with concealment (see Table 8–10: Concealment,
page 133) or striking the limbs of a creature whose vitals are beyond
reach.
Traps: Rogues (and only rogues) can use the Search skill to locate
traps when the task has a Difficulty Class higher than 20. Finding a
nonmagical trap has a DC of at least 20, higher if it is well hidden.
Finding a magic trap has a DC of 25 + the level of the spell used to
create it.
Rogues (and only rogues) can use the Disable Device skill to
disarm magic traps. A magic trap generally has a DC of 25 + the level
of the spell used to create it.
A rogue who beats a trap’s DC by 10 or more with a Disable
Device check can generally study a trap, figure out how it works,
and bypass it (with his party) without disarming it.
Evasion: At 2nd level, a rogue gains evasion. If exposed to any
effect that normally allows a character to attempt a Reflex saving
throw for half damage (such as a fireball), she takes no damage with a
successful saving throw. Evasion can only be used if the rogue is
wearing light armor or no armor. It is an extraordinary ability.
Uncanny Dodge: Starting at 3rd level, the rogue gains the
extraordinary ability to react to danger before her senses would
normally allow her to do so. At 3rd level and above, she retains her
Dexterity bonus to AC (if any) regardless of being caught flat-footed
or struck by an invisible attacker. (She still loses her Dexterity bonus
to AC if immobilized.)
At 6th level , the rogue can no longer be flanked; she can react to
opponents on opposite sides of her as easily as she can react to a
single attacker. This defense denies other rogues the ability to use
flank attacks to sneak attack her. The exception to this defense is
that another rogue at least four levels higher than the character can
flank her (and thus sneak attack her).
At 11th level, the rogue gains an intuitive sense that alerts her to
danger from traps, giving her a +1 bonus to Reflex saves made to
avoid traps and a +1 dodge bonus to AC against attacks by traps. At
14th level, these bonuses rise to +2. At 17th, they rise to +3, and at
20th they rise to +4.
Special Abilities: On achieving 10th level and every three levels
thereafter (13th, 16th, and 19th), a rogue gets a special ability of her
choice from among the following:
Crippling Strike: A rogue with this extraordinary ability can sneak
attack opponents with such precision that her blows weaken and
hamper them. When the rogue damages an opponent with a sneak
attack, that character also takes 1 point of temporary Strength
damage. Ability points lost to damage return on their own at the rate
of 1 point per day for each damaged ability.
Defensive Roll: The rogue can roll with a potentially lethal blow to
take less damage from it. Once per day, when a rogue would be
reduced to 0 hit points or less by damage in combat (from a weapon
or other blow, not a spell or special ability), the rogue can attempt to
roll with the damage. She makes a Reflex saving throw (DC =
damage dealt) and, if she’s successful, she takes only half damage
from the blow. She must be aware of the attack and able to react to it
in order to execute her defensive roll—if she is denied her Dexterity
bonus to AC, she can’t roll. Since this effect would not normally
allow a character to make a Reflex save for half damage, the rogue’s
evasion ability does not apply to the defensive roll.
Improved Evasion: This ability works like evasion, except that
while the rogue still takes no damage on a successful Reflex save
against spells such as fireball or a breath weapon, she now takes only
half damage on a failed save (the rogue’s reflexes allow her to get out
of harm’s way with incredible speed).
Opportunist: Once per round, the rogue can make an attack of
opportunity against an opponent who has just been struck for
damage in melee by another character. This attack counts as the
rogue’s attack of opportunity for that round. Even a rogue with the
Combat Reflexes feat can’t use the opportunist ability more than
once per round.
Skill Mastery: The rogue selects a number of skills equal to 3 + her
Intelligence modifier. When making a skill check with one of these
skills, the rogue may take 10 even if stress and distractions would
normally prevent her from doing so. She becomes so certain in her
skill that she can use her skill reliably even under adverse
conditions. The rogue may gain this special ability multiple times,
selecting additional skills for it to apply to each time.
Slippery Mind: This extraordinary ability represents the rogue’s
ability to wriggle free from magical effects that would otherwise
control or compel her. If a rogue with a slippery mind is affected by
an enchantment and fails her saving throw, 1 round later she can
attempt her saving throw again. She only gets this one extra chance
to succeed at her saving throw.
Feat: A rogue may gain a feat in place of a special ability.

Sorcerer
Sorcerers create magic the way a poet creates poems, with inborn
talent honed by practice. They have no books, no mentors, no
theories—just raw power that they direct at will.
Some sorcerers claim that the blood of dragons courses through
their veins. It may even be true—it is common knowledge that
certain powerful dragons can take humanoid form and even have
humanoid lovers, and it’s difficult to prove that a given sorcerer does
not have a dragon ancestor. Sorcerers even often have striking good
looks, usually with a touch of the exotic that hints at an unusual
heritage. Still, the claim that sorcerers are partially draconic is either
an unsubstantiated boast on the part of certain sorcerers or envious
gossip on the part of those who lack the sorcerer’s gift.
Adventures: The typical sorcerer adventures in order to improve
his abilities. Only by testing his limits can he expand them. A
sorcerer’s power is inborn, and part of his soul. Developing this
power is a quest in itself for many sorcerers, regardless of how they
wish to use their power.
Some good sorcerers are driven by the need to prove themselves.
Marked as different by their power, they seek to win a place in
society and to prove themselves to others. Evil sorcerers, however,
also feel themselves set apart from others—apart and above. They
adventure to gain power over those they look down on.
Characteristics: Sorcerers cast spells through innate power
rather than through carefully trained skills. Their magic is intuitive
rather than logical. They know fewer spells than wizards do and
acquire powerful spells more slowly than wizards, but they can cast
spells more often and have no need to select and prepare them
ahead of time. Nor do sorcerers specialize in certain schools of
magic the way wizards may.
Since sorcerers gain their powers without undergoing the years of
rigorous study that wizards go through, they have more time to
learn fighting skills. They are proficient with simple weapons.
Alignment: For a sorcerer, magic is an intuitive art, not a science.
Sorcery favors the free, chaotic, creative spirit over the disciplined
mind, so sorcerers tend slightly toward chaos over law.
Religion: Some sorcerers favor Boccob, god of magic, while
others revere Wee Jas, goddess of death magic. However, many
sorcerers follow some other deity, or none at all (wizards typically
learn to follow Boccob or Wee Jas from their mentors, but most
sorcerers are self-taught, having no master to induct them into a
religion).
Background: Sorcerers develop rudimentary powers at puberty.
Their first spells are incomplete, spontaneous, uncontrolled, and
sometimes dangerous. A household with a budding sorcerer in it
may be troubled by strange sounds or lights, creating the impression
that the place is haunted. Eventually, the young sorcerer
understands the power that he has been wielding unintentionally.
From that point on, he can begin practicing and improving his
powers.
Sometimes a sorcerer is fortunate enough to come under the care
of an older, experienced sorcerer, someone to help him understand
and use his new powers. More often, however, sorcerers are on their
own, feared by erstwhile friends and misunderstood by family.
Sorcerers have no sense of identity as a group. Unlike wizards,
they gain little by sharing their knowledge and have no strong
incentive to work together.
Races: Most sorcerers are humans or half-elves. The innate talent
for sorcery, however, is unpredictable, and it can show up in any of
the common races.
Arcane spellcasters from savage lands or from among the brutal
humanoids are more likely to be sorcerers than wizards. Kobolds are
especially likely to be sorcerers, and they are fierce, if inarticulate,
proponents of the “blood of the dragons” theory.
Other Classes: Sorcerers find they have the most in common
with members of other self-taught classes, such as druids and rogues.
They sometimes find themselves at odds with members of the more
disciplined classes, such as paladins and monks. Since they cast the
same spells as wizards but do so in a different way, they are
sometimes competitive toward them.
Since sorcerers often have a powerful presence that gives them a
way with people, they frequently serve as the “face” for an
adventuring party, negotiating, bargaining, and speaking for others.
The sorcerer’s spells often help him sway others or gain information,
so he makes an excellent spy or diplomat for an adventuring party.
GAME RULE INFORMATION
Sorcerers have the following game statistics.
Abilities: Charisma determines how powerful a spell a sorcerer
can cast, how many spells the sorcerer can cast per day, and how
hard those spells are to resist. To cast a spell, a sorcerer must have a
Charisma score of 10 + the spell’s level. A sorcerer gets bonus spells
based on Charisma. The Difficulty Class of a saving throw against a
sorcerer’s spell is 10 + the spell’s level + the sorcerer’s Charisma
modifier. Like a wizard, a sorcerer benefits from high Dexterity and
Constitution scores.
Alignment: Any.
Hit Die: d4.
Class Skills
The sorcerer’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are
Alchemy (Int), Concentration (Con), Craft (Int), Knowledge
(arcana) (Int), Profession (Wis), Scry (Int, exclusive skill),
and Spellcraft (Int). See Chapter 4: Skills for skill
descriptions.
Skill Points at 1st Level: (2 + Int modifier) x 4.
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 2 +
Int modifier.
Class Features
All of the following are class features of
the sorcerer.
Weapon and Armor
Proficiency: Sorcerers are
proficient with all simple weapons.
They are not proficient with any type
of armor, nor with shields. Armor of
any type interferes with a sorcerer’s
arcane gestures, which can cause his
spells to fail (if those spells have
somatic components). Note that
armor check penalties for armor
heavier than leather apply to the
skills Balance, Climb, Escape
Artist, Hide, Jump, Move
Silently, Pick Pocket, and
Tumble. Also, Swim checks
suffer a –1 penalty for every
5 pounds of armor and
equipment carried.
Spells: A sorcerer casts
arcane spells, the same type of
spells available to wizards. A sorcerer’s selection of spells
is extremely limited. Your sorcerer begins play knowing
four 0-level spells (also called cantrips) and two 1st-level
spells of your choice. At each level, the sorcerer gains one
or more new spells, as indicated on Table 3–17:
Sorcerer Spells Known. (Note: The number of spells a
sorcerer knows is not affected by his Charisma
bonus, if any; the numbers on Table 3–17 are
fixed.) These spells can be common spells chosen
from the sorcerer and wizard spell list (page 168), or they can be
unusual spells that the sorcerer has gained some understanding of
by study. For example, a sorcerer with a scroll or spellbook detailing
an unusual sorcerer/wizard spell (one not on the wizard/sorcerer
spell list in this book) could select that spell as one of his new spells
for achieving a new level, provided the spell is the right level. In any
case, the sorcerer can’t learn spells at a faster rate due to this means.
A sorcerer is limited to casting a certain number of spells of each
level per day, but he need not prepare his spells in advance. The
number of spells he can cast per day is improved by his bonus spells,
if any. For instance, at 1st level, the sorcerer Hennet can cast four
1st-level spells per day—three for being 1st level (see Table 3–16:
The Sorcerer), plus one thanks to his high Charisma. However, he
only knows two 1st-level spells: magic missile and sleep (see Table 3–
17: Sorcerer Spells Known). In any given day, he can cast magic
missile four times, cast sleep four times, or cast some combination of
the two spells a total of four times. He does not have to decide ahead
of time which spells he’ll cast.
A sorcerer may use a higher-level slot to cast a lower-level spell if
he so chooses. For example, if an 8th-level sorcerer has used up all of
his 3rd-level spells slots for the day but wants to cast another one, he
could use a 4th-level slot to do so. The spell is still treated as its
actual level, not the level of the slot used to cast it.
To learn or cast a spell, a sorcerer must have a Charisma score of at
least 10 + the spell’s level. The Difficulty Class for saving throws
against sorcerer spells is 10 + the spell’s level + the sorcerer’s
Charisma modifier.
Familiar: A sorcerer can obtain
a familiar. Doing so takes a day
and uses up magical materials
that cost 100 gp. A familiar is a
magical, unusually tough, and
intelligent version of a small
animal (see the facing page). It is a
magical beast, not an animal. The
creature serves as a companion and
servant.
The sorcerer chooses the type of familiar
he gets. As the sorcerer increases in level, his
familiar also increases in power.
If the familiar dies, or the sorcerer chooses to
dismiss it, the sorcerer must attempt a
Fortitude saving throw (DC 15). If the
saving throw fails, the sorcerer loses 200
experience points per class level. A
successful saving throw reduces the
loss to half of that amount.
However, a sorcerer’s experience
point total can never go below
zero as the result of a
familiar’s demise. For
example, Hennet is a 3rdlevel sorcerer with 3,230 XP
when his owl is killed by a
bugbear. Hennet makes a successful
saving throw, so he loses 300 XP,
dropping him below 3,000 XP and back
to 2nd level (the DUNGEON MASTER’s
Guide has rules for losing levels). A slain or
dismissed familiar cannot be replaced for a
year and day. Slain familiars can be raised from
the dead just as characters can be, but do not
lose a level or a Constitution point when this
happy event occurs.

FAMILIARS
Familiars are magically linked to their masters. In some sense, the
familiar and the master are practically one being. That’s why, for
example, the master can cast a personal range spell on a familiar even
though normally he can only cast such a spell on himself. Familiars are
similar to the normal creatures they resemble. However, some familiars
have special abilities or grant special abilities to their master (a sorcerer
or wizard), as given on Table 3–18: Familiars. These special abilities
only apply when the master and familiar are within one mile of each
other.
TABLE 3—18: FAMILIARS
Familiar Special
Bat —
Cat Master gains a +2 bonus to Move Silently checks
Hawk —
Owl Has low-light vision; master gains a +2 bonus on
Move Silently checks
Rat Master gains a +2 bonus to Fortitude saves
Raven Speaks one language
Snake (Tiny) Poisonous bite
Weasel Master gains a +2 bonus on Reflex saves
Toad Master gains +2 to Constitution score
Familiar Basics: Use the basic statistics for a creature of its type,
as given in the Monster Manual, but make these changes:
Hit Dice: Treat as the master’s character level (for effects related to
Hit Dice). Use the familiar’s normal total if it is higher.
Hit Points: One-half the master’s total, rounded down. For example,
at 2nd level, Hennet has 9 hit points, so his familiar has 4.
Attacks: Use the master’s base attack bonus. Use the familiar’s
Dexterity or Strength modifier, whichever is greater, to get the familiar’s
melee attack bonus with unarmed attacks. Damage equals that of a
normal creature of that type.
Saving Throws: The familiar uses the master’s base saving throw
bonuses if they’re better than the familiar’s (Fortitude +2, Reflex +2,
Will +0).
Skills: Use the normal skills for an animal of that type or the
master’s, whichever are better.
Familiar Ability Descriptions: All familiars have special abilities (or
impart abilities to their masters) depending on the level of the master,
as shown on Table 3–19. The abilities on Table 3–19 are cumulative.
Natural Armor: This number improves the familiar’s AC. It represents
a familiar’s preternatural toughness.
Intelligence: The familiar’s Intelligence score. Familiars are as smart
as people (though not necessarily as smart as smart people).
Alertness: The presence of the familiar sharpens its master’s senses.
While the familiar is within arm’s reach, the master gains Alertness.
Improved Evasion: If the familiar is subjected to an attack that
normally allows a Reflex saving throw for half damage, the familiar
takes no damage if it makes a successful saving throw and half damage
even if the saving throw fails. Improved evasion is an extraordinary
ability.
Share Spells: At the master’s option, he may have any spell he casts
on himself also affect his familiar. The familiar must be within 5 feet at
the time. If the spell has a duration other than instantaneous, the spell
stops affecting the familiar if it moves farther than 5 feet away. The
spell’s effect will not be restored even if the familiar returns to the
master before the duration would otherwise have ended. Additionally,
the master may cast a spell with a target of “you” on his familiar (as a
touch range spell) instead of on himself. The master and familiar can
share spells even if the spells normally do not affect creatures of the
familiar’s type (magical beast).
Empathic Link: The master has an empathic link with the familiar out
to a distance of up to one mile. The master cannot see through the
familiar’s eyes, but the two of them can communicate telepathically.
Note that the low Intelligence of a low-level master’s familiar limits what
it is able to communicate or understand, and even intelligent familiars
see the world differently from humans. This is a supernatural ability.
Because of the empathic link between the familiar and the master,
the master has the same connection to an item or place that the
familiar does. For instance, if his familiar has seen a room, a master can
teleport into that room as if he has seen it too.
Touch: If the master is 3rd level or higher, the familiar can deliver
touch spells for the master. When the master casts a touch spell, he
can designate his familiar as the “toucher.” (The master and the familiar
have to be in contact at the time of casting.) The familiar can then
deliver the touch spell just as the master could. As normal, if the master
casts another spell, the touch spell dissipates.
Speak with Master: The familiar and master can communicate
verbally as if they were using a common language. Other creatures do
not understand the communication without magical help.
Speak with Animals of Its Type: The familiar can communicate with
animals of approximately the same type as itself (including dire
variants): bats and rats with rodents, cats with felines, hawks and owls
and ravens with birds, snakes with reptiles, toads with amphibians,
weasels with creatures of the mustelidae family (weasels, minks,
polecats, ermines, skunks, wolverines, and badgers). The
communication is limited by the Intelligence of the conversing
creatures.
Spell Resistance: If the master is 11th level or higher, the familiar
gains spell resistance equal to the master’s level + 5. If another
spellcaster tries to affect someone else’s familiar with a spell, that
spellcaster must make a caster level check (1d20 + caster level) at least
equal to the familiar’s spell resistance.
Scry: If the master is 13th level or higher, the master may scry on
the familiar (as if casting the spell scrying) once per day. This is a spelllike ability that requires no material components or focus.
TABLE 3—19: FAMILIAR SPECIAL ABILITIES
Master Natural
Class Level Armor Int Special
1–2 +1 6 Alertness, improved evasion, share
spells, empathic link
3–4 +2 7 Touch
5–6 +3 8 Speak with master
7–8 +4 9 Speak with animals of its type
9–10 +5 10
11–12 +6 11 Spell resistance
13–14 +7 12 Scry on familiar
15–16 +8 13
17–18 +9 14
19–20 +10 15

Wizards
A few unintelligible words and a fleeting gesture
carry more power than a battleaxe, when they are
the words and gestures of a wizard. These
simple acts make magic seem easy, but they
only hint at the time the wizard must spend
poring over her spellbook preparing each
spell for casting, and the years before that spent in
apprenticeship to learn the arts of magic.
Wizards depend on intensive study to create their
magic. They examine musty old tomes, debate
magical theory with their peers, and practice
minor magics whenever they can. For a
wizard, magic is not a talent but a difficult,
rewarding art.
Adventures: Wizards conduct their adventures with
caution and forethought. When prepared, they can use their spells
to devastating effect. When caught by surprise, they are vulnerable.
They seek knowledge, power, and the resources to conduct their
studies. They may also have any of the noble or ignoble motivations
that other adventurers have.
Characteristics: The wizard’s strength is her spells. Everything
else is secondary. She learns new spells as she experiments and
grows in experience, and she can also learn them from other
wizards. In addition to learning new spells,
over time a wizard learns to manipulate
her spells so they go farther, work better,
or are improved in some other way.
Some wizards prefer to specialize in a
certain type of magic. Specialization
makes a wizard more powerful in her
chosen field, but prevents her from being
able to cast some of the spells that lie
outside her field. (See School
Specialization, page 54.)
A wizard can call a familiar: a small,
magical animal companion that serves her.
For some wizards, their familiars are their
only true friends.
Alignment: Overall, wizards show a
slight tendency toward law over chaos
because the study of magic rewards those
who are disciplined. Illusionists and
transmuters, however, are masters of
deception and change, respectively. They
favor chaos over law.
Religion: Wizards commonly revere
Boccob, god of magic. Some,
especially necromancers or simply
more misanthropic wizards, prefer
Wee Jas, goddess of magic and death.
Evil necromancers are known to
worship Nerull, god of death.
Wizards in general, however, are
more devoted to their studies than
to their spiritual sides.
Background: Wizards recognize each other as
comrades or rivals. Even wizards from very different cultures or
magical traditions have much in common because they all conform
to the universal laws of magic. Unlike fighters or rogues, wizards see
themselves as members of a distinct, if diverse, group. In civilized
lands where wizards study in academies, schools, or guilds, wizards
also identify themselves and others according to membership in
these formal organizations. While a guild magician may look down
her nose at a rustic wizard who learned his arts from a doddering
hermit, she nevertheless can’t deny the rustic’s identity as a wizard.
Races: Humans take to magic for any of their varied reasons:
curiosity, ambition, lust for power, or just personal inclination.
Human wizards tend to be practical innovators, creating new spells
or using old spells creatively.
Elves are fascinated by magic, and many of
them become wizards for love of the art. Elven
wizards see themselves as artists, and they hold
magic in high regard as a wondrous mystery, as
opposed to more pragmatic human wizards who
see magic more as a set of tools or tricks.
Illusion magic comes so simply to gnomes that
becoming an illusionist is just natural to brighter and
more talented gnomes. Gnome wizards that don’t
specialize in the school of illusion are rare, but they
don’t suffer under any special stigma.
Half-elf wizards feel both the elf’s attraction to magic
and the human’s drive to conquer and understand. Some
of the most powerful wizards are half-elves.
Dwarf and halfling wizards are rare because their
societies don’t encourage the study of magic. Half-orc
wizards are rare because few half-orcs have the brains
necessary for wizardry.
Drow (evil, subterranean elves) are commonly wizards, but
wizards are quite rare among the savage humanoids.
Other Classes: Wizards prefer to work with members of
other classes. They love to cast their spells from behind
strong fighters, to “magic up” rogues and send them out to
scout, and to rely on the divine healing of clerics. They may
find certain types, such as sorcerers, rogues, and bards, not quite
serious enough, but they’re not judgmental.
GAME RULE INFORMATION
Wizards have the following game statistics.
Abilities: Intelligence determines how powerful
a spell a wizard can cast, how many spells she can
cast, and how hard those spells are to resist. To cast
a spell, a wizard must have an Intelligence score of
10 + the spell’s level. In addition, a wizard gets
bonus spells based on Intelligence. The Difficulty
Class of a saving throw against a wizard’s spell is 10
+ the spell’s level + the wizard’s Intelligence
modifier. High Dexterity is helpful for a wizard,
who typically wears little or no armor, because it
provides her with an Armor Class bonus. A good
Constitution gives a wizard extra hit points, a resource that she is
otherwise very low on.
Alignment: Any.
Hit Die: d4.
Class Skills
The wizard’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are
Alchemy (Int), Concentration (Con), Craft (Int), Knowledge (all
skills, taken individually) (Int), Profession (Wis), Scry (Int, exclusive
skill), and Spellcraft (Int). See Chapter 4: Skills for skill descriptions.
Skill Points at 1st Level: (2 + Int modifier) x 4.
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 2 + Int modifier.
Class Features
All of the following are class features of
the wizard.
Weapon and Armor Proficiency:
Wizards are skilled with the club, dagger,
heavy crossbow, light crossbow, and
quarterstaff. Wizards are not
proficient with any type of armor
nor with shields. Armor of any
type interferes with a wizard’s
movements, which can
cause her spells to fail (if
those spells have
somatic
components). Note
that armor check
penalties for armor
heavier than leather
apply to the skills
Balance, Climb,
Escape Artist, Hide,
Jump, Move Silently,
Pick Pocket, and
Tumble. Also, Swim
checks suffer a –1
penalty for every 5
pounds of armor and
equipment carried.
Spells: A wizard
casts arcane spells. She is
limited to a certain
number of spells of
each spell level per
day, according to her
class level. A wizard must
prepare spells ahead of time by
getting a good night’s sleep and spending
1 hour studying her spellbook. While studying, the wizard decides
which spells to prepare (see Preparing Wizard Spells, page 154). To
learn, prepare, or cast a spell, a wizard must have an Intelligence
score of at least 10 + the spell’s level. A wizard’s bonus spells are
based on Intelligence (see Table 1–1: Ability Modifiers and Bonus 
Spells, page 8). The Difficulty Class for saving throws against wizard
spells is 10 + the spell’s level + the wizard’s Intelligence modifier.
Unlike bards and sorcerers, wizards may know any number of
spells (see Writing a New Spell into a Spellbook, page 155).
Bonus Languages: A wizard may substitute Draconic for one of
the bonus languages available to the character because of her race
(see Chapter 2: Races), since many ancient tomes of magic are
written in Draconic and apprentice wizards often learn it as part of
their studies.
Familiar: A wizard can obtain a familiar in exactly the same
manner as a sorcerer. See the sorcerer description and the
accompanying Familiars sidebar for details.
Scribe Scroll: A wizard has the bonus item creation feat Scribe
Scroll, enabling her to create magic scrolls (see the feat, page 84, and
Magic Item Creation in the DUNGEON MASTER’s Guide).
Bonus Feats: Every five levels, a wizard gains a bonus feat. This
feat must be a metamagic feat, an item creation feat, or Spell Mastery
(see below).
Note: these feats are in addition to those granted to every
character by level regardless of class (see Table 3–2: Experience and
Level-Dependent Benefits). Feats granted by overall character level
(as opposed to class level), and the starting bonus feat for human
characters, need not be metamagic or item creation feats.
Spellbooks: Wizards must study their spellbooks each day to
prepare their spells (see Preparing Wizard Spells, page 154). A
wizard cannot prepare any spell not recorded in her spellbook
(except for read magic, which all wizards can prepare from memory).
A wizard begins play with a spellbook containing all 0-level wizard
spells plus three 1st-level spells of the player’s choice. For each point
of Intelligence bonus the wizard has (see Table 1–1: Ability
Modifiers and Bonus Spells, page 8), the spellbook holds one
additional 1st-level spell. Each time the wizard achieves a new level,
she gains two new spells of any level or levels that she can cast
(according to her new level). For example, when Mialee achieves 5th
level, she can add two 3rd-level spells to her spellbook. The wizard
can also add spells found in other wizards’ spellbooks (see Adding
Spells to a Wizard’s Spellbook, page 155).
Spell Mastery: A wizard (and only a wizard) can take the special
feat Spell Mastery. Each time the wizard takes this feat, choose a
number of spells equal to the wizard’s Intelligence modifier (they
must be spells that the wizard already knows). From that point on,
the wizard can prepare these spells without referring to a spellbook.
The wizard is so intimately familiar with these spells that she doesn’t
need a spellbook to prepare them anymore.

ARCANE SPELLS AND ARMOR
Wizards and sorcerers do not know how to wear armor effectively. They
can wear armor anyway (though they’ll be clumsy in it), and they can
gain training in the proper use of armor (with the various Armor
Proficiency feats—light, medium, and heavy—and the Shield Proficiency
feat) or multiclass to add a class that grants them armor use (see
Multiclass Characters later in this chapter). By contrast, bards do know
how to wear light and medium armor effectively. However, they too
wear heavier armor ineffectively and must either learn to wear heavier
armor via the feat Armor Proficiency (heavy) or add a class (such as
fighter) that grants them such Armor Proficiency as a class feature.
Even if a wizard, sorcerer, or bard is wearing armor with which he or
she is proficient, however, it might still interfere with his or her spells.
Characters have a difficult time casting most arcane spells while
wearing armor (see Arcane Spells, page 154). The armor restricts the
complicated gestures that they must make while casting any spell that
has a somatic component (most do). To find the chance of arcane spell
failure for a wizard, sorcerer, or bard wearing different types of armor,
see Table 7–5: Armor, page 104.
If a spell doesn’t have a somatic component, arcane spellcasters can
cast it with no problem while wearing armor. Such spells can also be cast
even if the caster’s hands are bound or if he or she is being grappled
(although Concentration checks still apply). Also, the metamagic feat Still
Spell allows a spellcaster to prepare or cast a spell at one level higher
than normal without the somatic component, which is a way of casting a
spell while wearing armor without risking the chance of arcane spell
failure. See Chapter 5: Feats for more about metamagic feats such as
Still Spell.

SCHOOL SPECIALIZATION
A school is one of eight groupings of spells, each defined by a common
theme, such as illusion or necromancy. A wizard may specialize in one
school of magic (see below). Specialization allows a wizard to cast extra
spells from the chosen school, but the wizard then never learns to cast
spells from one or more other schools. Essentially, the wizard gains
exceptional mastery over a single school by neglecting the study of other
schools. The more difficult a school is to master, the more one must give
up in order to specialize in it. Some schools only require that a specialist
give up one other school, while others might require the giving up of two
or three. Spells of the school or schools that the specialist gives up are
not available to her, and she can’t even cast such spells from scrolls or
wands. The wizard must choose whether to specialize and how at 1st
level. She may not change her specialization later. The specialist can
prepare one additional spell (of the school selected as a specialty) per
spell level each day. The specialist gains a +2 bonus to Spellcraft checks
to learn the spells of her chosen school (see Adding Spells to a Wizard’s
Spellbook, page 155).
The eight schools of arcane magic are Abjuration, Conjuration,
Divination, Enchantment, Evocation, Illusion, Necromancy, and
Transmutation. Spells that do not fall into any of these schools are called
universal spells.
Abjuration: Spells that protect, block, or banish. An Abjuration
specialist is called an abjurer. To become an abjurer, a wizard must
select her prohibited school or schools from the following choices: (1)
either Conjuration, Enchantment, Evocation, Illusion, or Transmutation;
or (2) both Divination and Necromancy.
Conjuration: Spells that bring creatures or materials to the caster. A
Conjuration specialist is called a conjurer. To become a conjurer, a
wizard must select her prohibited school or schools from one of the
following choices: (1) Evocation; (2) any two of the following three
schools: Abjuration, Enchantment, and Illusion; (3) Transmutation, or (4)
any three schools.
Divination: Spells that reveal information. A Divination specialist is
called a diviner. To become a diviner, a wizard must select any other
single school as her prohibited school.
Enchantment: Spells that imbue the recipient with some property or
grant the caster power over another being. An Enchantment specialist is
called an enchanter. To become an enchanter, a wizard must select her
prohibited school or schools from the following choices: (1) either
Abjuration, Conjuration, Evocation, Illusion, or Transmutation; or (2)
both Divination and Necromancy.
Evocation: Spells that manipulate energy or create something from
nothing. An Evocation specialist is called an evoker. To become an
evoker, a wizard must select her prohibited school or schools from one of
the following choices: (1) Conjuration; (2) any two of the following three
schools: Abjuration, Enchantment, and Illusion; (3) Transmutation; or (4)
any three schools.
Illusion: Spells that alter perception or create false images. An Illusion
specialist is called an illusionist. To become an illusionist, a wizard must
select her prohibited school or schools from the following choices: (1)
either Abjuration, Conjuration, Enchantment, Evocation, or
Transmutation; or (2) both Divination and Necromancy.
Necromancy: Spells that manipulate, create, or destroy life or life
force. A Necromancy specialist is called a necromancer. To become a
necromancer, a wizard must select any other single school as her
prohibited school.
Transmutation: Spells that transform the recipient physically or change
its properties in a more subtle way. A Transmutation specialist is called a
transmuter. To become a transmuter, a wizard must select her prohibited
school or schools from one of the following choices: (1) Conjuration; (2)
Evocation; (3) any two of the following three schools: Abjuration,
Enchantment, and Illusion; or (4) any three schools.
Universal: Not a school, but a category for spells all wizards can learn.
A wizard cannot select universal as a specialty school or as a school to
which she does not have access.








BARBARIAN
From the frozen wastes of the north and the hellish jungles of the
south come brave, even reckless, warriors. Civilized people call them
barbarians or berserkers and suspect them of mayhem, impiety, and
atrocities. These “barbarians,” however, have proven their mettle and
their value to those who would be their allies. To enemies who
underestimated them, they have proved their cunning, resourcefulness, persistence, and mercilessness.
Adventures: Adventuring is the best chance barbarians have of
finding a place in a civilized society. They’re not well suited to the
monotony of guard duty or other mundane tasks. Barbarians also
have no trouble with the dangers, the uncertainties, and the wandering that adventuring involves. They may adventure to defeat
hated enemies. They have a noted distaste for that which they
consider unnatural, including undead, demons, and devils.
Characteristics: The barbarian is an excellent warrior. Where
the fighter’s skill in combat comes from training and discipline,
however, the barbarian has a powerful rage. While in this berserk
fury, he becomes stronger and tougher, better able to defeat his foes
and withstand their attacks. These rages leave him winded, and he
has the energy for only a few such spectacular displays per day, but
those few rages are usually sufficient. He is at home in the wild, and
he runs at great speed.
Alignment: Barbarians are never lawful. They may be honorable,
but at heart they are wild. This wildness is their strength, and it
could not live in a lawful soul. At best, barbarians of chaotic
alignment are free and expressive. At worst, they are thoughtlessly
destructive.
Religion: Some barbarians distrust established religions and
prefer an intuitive, natural relationship to the cosmos over formal
worship. Others devote themselves to powerful deities, such as Kord
(god of strength), Obad-Hai (god of nature), or Erythnul (god of
slaughter). A barbarian is capable of fierce devotion to his god.
Background: Barbarians come from uncivilized lands or from
barbaric tribes on the outskirts of civilization. A barbarian adventurer may have been lured to the settled lands by the promise of
riches, may have escaped after being captured in his homeland and
sold into “civilized” slavery, may have been recruited as a soldier, or
may have been driven out of his homeland by invaders. Barbarians
share no bond with each other unless they come from the same tribe
or land. In fact, they think of themselves not as barbarians but as
warriors.
Races: Human barbarians come from the distant wild lands on
the edge of civilization. Most half-orc barbarians lived among orcs
before abandoning them for human lands. Dwarf barbarians are rare,
usually hailing from dwarven kingdoms that have fallen into
barbarism as a result of recurrent war with goblinoids, orcs, and
giants. Barbarians of other races are very rare.
Among the brutal humanoids, barbarians are more common than
fighters. Orcs and ogres are especially likely to be barbarians.
Other Classes: As people of the wild, barbarians are most comfortable in the company of rangers, druids, and clerics of nature
deities, such as Obad-Hai or Ehlonna. Many barbarians admire the
talents and spontaneity of bards, and some are enthusiastic lovers of
music. Barbarians don’t trust that which they don’t understand, and
that includes wizardry, which they call “book magic.” They find sorcerers more understandable than wizards, but maybe that’s just
because sorcerers tend to be more charismatic. Monks, with their
studied, practiced, deliberate approach to combat, sometimes have a
hard time seeing eye to eye with barbarians, but members of these
classes aren’t necessarily hostile to each other. Barbarians have no
special attitudes toward fighters, paladins, clerics, or rogues.
Role: A barbarian’s typical primary role in a group of adventurers
is as a front-line combat specialist. No other character can match his
sheer toughness. He can also serve as a good scout, thanks to his
speed, skill selection, and trap sense.
GAME RULE INFORMATION
Barbarians have the following game statistics.
Abilities: Strength is important for barbarians because of its role
in combat, and several barbarian class skills are based on Strength.
Dexterity is also useful to barbarians, especially those who wear light
armor. Wisdom is also important for several of the barbarian’s class
skills. A high Constitution score lets a barbarian rage longer (and
live longer, because it gives him more hit points).
Alignment: Any nonlawful.
Hit Die: d12.
Class Skills
The barbarian’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are
Climb (Str), Craft (Int), Handle Animal (Cha), Intimidate (Cha),
Jump (Str), Listen (Wis), Ride (Dex), Survival (Wis), and Swim (Str).
See Chapter 4: Skills for skill descriptions.
Skill Points at 1st Level: (4 + Int modifier) × 4.
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 4 + Int modifier. 
Class Features
All of the following are class features of the barbarian.
Weapon and Armor Proficiency: A barbarian is proficient with
all simple and martial weapons, light armor, medium armor, and
shields (except tower shields).
Fast Movement (Ex): A barbarian’s land
speed is faster than the norm for his race by
+10 feet. This benefit applies only when he is
wearing no armor, light armor, or medium
armor and not carrying a heavy load. Apply
this bonus before modifying the barbarian’s
speed because of any load carried or
armor worn. For example, a human
barbarian has a speed of 40 feet,
rather than 30 feet, when wearing
light or no armor. When wearing
medium armor or carrying a
medium load, his speed drops to
30 feet. A halfling barbarian has a
speed of 30 feet, rather than 20
feet, in light or no armor. When
wearing medium armor or
carrying a medium load, his
speed drops to 20 feet.
Illiteracy: Barbarians are the
only characters who do not
automatically know how to read
and write. A barbarian may spend 2
skill points to gain the ability to read and write all
languages he is able to speak.
A barbarian who gains a level in any other
class automatically gains literacy. Any other
character who gains a barbarian level does not
lose the literacy he or she already had.
Rage (Ex): A barbarian can fly into a
screaming blood frenzy a certain number
of times per day. In a rage, a barbarian
gains phenomenal strength and durability but becomes reckless and less
able to defend himself. He temporarily gains a +4 bonus to Strength, a
+4 bonus to Constitution, and a +2 morale
bonus on Will saves, but he takes a –2 penalty to Armor Class.
The increase in Constitution increases the barbarian’s hit points
by 2 points per level, but these hit points go away at the end of the
rage when his Constitution score drops back to normal. (These extra
hit points are not lost first the way temporary hit points are; see
Temporary Hit Points, page 146.) While raging, a barbarian
cannot use any Charisma-, Dexterity-, or Intelligence-based
skills (except for Balance, Escape Artist, Intimidate, and
Ride), the Concentration skill, or any abilities that require
patience or concentration, nor can he cast spells or activate
magic items that require a command word, a
spell trigger (such as a wand), or spell completion (such as a scroll) to function. He can use
any feat he has except Combat Expertise, item
creation feats, and metamagic
feats. A fit of rage lasts for a
number of rounds equal to 3 +
the character’s (newly
improved) Constitution
modifier. A barbarian
may prematurely end his
rage. At the end of the
rage, the barbarian loses
the rage modifiers and restrictions and becomes fatigued (–2
penalty to Strength, –2 penalty to Dexterity, can’t charge or run) for the
duration of the current encounter
(unless he is a 17th-level barbarian, at
which point this limitation no longer
applies; see below).
A barbarian can fly into a rage
only once per encounter. At 1st
level he can use his rage ability
once per day. At 4th level and
every four levels thereafter, he can use it
one additional time
per day (to a maximum
of six times per day at
20th level). Entering a rage
takes no time itself, but a
barbarian can do it only during
his action (see Initiative, page 136), not in response to someone else’s action. A barbarian can’t, for example, fly into a rage when
struck down by an arrow in order to get the extra hit points from the
increased Constitution, although the extra hit points would be of
benefit if he had gone into a rage earlier in the round, before the
arrow struck
Uncanny Dodge (Ex): At 2nd level, a barbarian gains the ability
to react to danger before his senses would normally allow him to do
so. He retains his Dexterity bonus to AC (if any) even if he is caught
flat-footed or struck by an invisible attacker. However, he still loses
his Dexterity bonus to AC if immobilized.
If a barbarian already has uncanny dodge from a different class (a
barbarian with at least four levels of rogue, for example), he
automatically gains improved uncanny dodge (see below) instead.
Trap Sense (Ex): Starting at 3rd level, a barbarian has an intuitive
sense that alerts him to danger from traps, giving him a +1 bonus on
Reflex saves made to avoid traps and a +1 dodge bonus to AC against
attacks made by traps. These bonuses rise by +1 every three
barbarian levels thereafter (6th, 9th, 12th, 15th, and 18th level). Trap
sense bonuses gained from multiple classes stack.
Improved Uncanny Dodge (Ex): At 5th level and higher, a
barbarian can no longer be flanked; he can react to opponents on
opposite sides of him as easily as he can react to a single attacker.
This defense denies a rogue the ability to sneak attack the barbarian
by flanking him, unless the attacker has at least four more rogue
levels than the target has barbarian levels.
If a character already has uncanny dodge (see above) from a
second class, the character automatically gains improved uncanny
dodge instead, and the levels from the classes that grant uncanny
dodge stack to determine the minimum level a rogue must be to
flank the character.
Damage Reduction (Ex): At 7th level, a barbarian gains the
ability to shrug off some amount of injury from each blow or attack.
Subtract 1 from the damage the barbarian takes each time he is dealt
damage from a weapon or a natural attack. At 10th level, and every
three barbarian levels thereafter (13th, 16th, and 19th level), this
damage reduction rises by 1 point. Damage reduction can reduce
damage to 0 but not below 0.
Greater Rage (Ex): At 11th level, a barbarian’s bonuses to
Strength and Constitution during his rage each increase to +6, and
his morale bonus on Will saves increases to +3. The penalty to AC
remains at –2.
Indomitable Will (Ex): While in a rage, a barbarian of 14th level
or higher gains a +4 bonus on Will saves to resist enchantment
spells. This bonus stacks with all other modifiers, including the
morale bonus on Will saves he also receives during his rage.
Tireless Rage (Ex): At 17th level and higher, a barbarian no
longer becomes fatigued at the end of his rage.
Mighty Rage (Ex): At 20th level, a barbarian’s bonuses to
Strength and Constitution during his rage each increase to +8, and
his morale bonus on Will saves increases to +4. The penalty to AC
remains at –2.
Ex-Barbarians
A barbarian who becomes lawful loses the ability to rage and cannot
gain more levels as a barbarian. He retains all the other benefits of
the class (damage reduction, fast movement, trap sense, and
uncanny dodge). 

BARD
It is said that music has a special magic, and the bard proves that
saying true. Wandering across the land, gathering lore, telling stories, working magic with his music, and living on the gratitude of
his audience—such is the life of a bard. When chance or opportunity draws them into a conflict, bards serve as diplomats, negotiators, messengers, scouts, and spies.
A bard’s magic comes from the heart. If his heart is good, a bard
brings hope and courage to the downtrodden and uses his tricks,
music, and magic to thwart the schemes of evildoers. If the nobles of
the land are corrupt, the good bard is an enemy of the state,
cunningly evading capture and raising the spirits of the oppressed.
But music can spring from an evil heart as well. Evil bards forego
blatant violence in favor of manipulation, holding sway over the
hearts and minds of others and taking what enraptured audiences
“willingly” give.
Adventures: Bards see adventures as opportunities to learn. They
practice their many skills and abilities, and they especially relish the
opportunity to enter a long-forgotten tomb, to discover ancient
works of magic, to decipher old tomes, to travel to strange places, to
encounter exotic creatures, and to learn new songs and stories. Bards
love to accompany heroes (and villains), joining their entourage to
witness their deeds firsthand—a bard who can tell a marvelous story
from personal experience earns renown among his fellows. Indeed,
after telling so many stories about heroes doing mighty deeds, many
bards take these themes to heart and assume heroic roles themselves.
Characteristics: A bard brings forth magic from his soul, not
from a book. He can cast only a small number of spells, but he can
do so without selecting or preparing them in advance. His magic
emphasizes charms and illusions over the more dramatic evocation
spells that wizards and sorcerers often use.
In addition to spells, a bard works magic with his music and
poetry. He can encourage allies, hold his audiences rapt, and counter
magical effects that rely on speech or sound.
Bards have some of the skills that rogues have, although bards
they are not as focused on skill mastery as rogues are. A bard listens
to stories as well as telling them, of course, so he has a vast knowledge of local events and noteworthy items.
Alignment: Bards are wanderers, guided by whim and intuition
rather than by tradition or law. The spontaneous talent, magic, and
lifestyle of the bard are incompatible with a lawful alignment.
Religion: Bards revere Fharlanghn (god of roads). They sometimes camp near his wayside shrines, hoping to earn some coin from
the travelers who stop to leave offerings for the god. Many bards,
even those who are not elves, worship Corellon Larethian, god of
elves and patron of poetry and music. Many good bards are partial to
Pelor (god of the sun), believing that he watches over them in their
travels. Bards given to chaos and occasional larceny favor
Olidammara (god of thieves). Those who have turned to evil ways
are known to worship Erythnul (the god of slaughter), though few
will admit to it. In any event, bards spend so much time on the road
that, while they may be devoted to a deity, they are rarely devoted to
any particular temple.
Background: An apprentice bard learns his skills from a
single experienced bard, whom he follows and serves until he is
ready to strike out on his own. Many bards were once young runaways or orphans, befriended by wandering bards who became
their mentors. Since bards occasionally congregate in informal
“colleges,” the apprentice bard may
meet many of the more prominent
bards in the area. Still, the bard has no
strong allegiance to bards as a whole.
In fact, some bards are highly
competitive with other bards, jealous
of their reputations and defensive
about their territories.
Races: Bards are commonly
human, gnome, elf, or half-elf.
Humans take well to the wandering life and adapt easily to new
lands and customs. Gnomes
have a sense of humor and
trickery that lends itself to a
bardic career. Elves are talented
in music and magic, so
the career of the bard
comes naturally to them.
A bard’s wandering ways
suit many half-elves, who
often feel like strangers
even when at home.
Half-orcs, even those raised
among humans, find themselves
ill suited to the demands of a
bard’s career. There are no bardic
traditions among dwarves,
or halflings, though
occasional individuals of these races
find teachers to train them in the ways
of the bard.
Bards are exceedingly rare among the savage humanoids, except
among centaurs. Centaur bards sometimes train the children of
humans or other humanoids.
Other Classes: A bard works well
with companions of other classes. He
often serves as the spokesman of the
party, using his social skills for the
party’s benefit. In a party without a
wizard or sorcerer, the bard contributes his magic. In a party
without a rogue, he uses his skills.
A bard is curious about the ways
of more focused or dedicated
adventurers, so he often tries to
pick up pointers from
fighters, sorcerers, and
rogues.
Role: The bard is perhaps the
ultimate generalist. In most
adventuring groups, he works best
in a supporting role. He can’t usually
match the stealth of the ranger or
the rogue, the spellcasting
power of the cleric or the
wizard, or the combat prowess
of the barbarian or the fighter.
However, he makes all the
other characters better at what
they do, and he can often fill in
for another character when needed.
For a typical group of four
characters, the bard is perhaps
the most useful fifth character to
consider adding, and he can make a
great team leader.
GAME RULE INFORMATION
Bards have the following game statistics.
Abilities: Charisma determines how
powerful a spell a bard can cast, how many
spells he can cast per day, and how hard
those spells are to resist (see Spells, below). Charisma, Dexterity, and
Intelligence are important for many of the bard’s class skills.
Alignment: Any nonlawful.
Hit Die: d6.
Class Skills
The bard’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are Appraise
(Int), Balance (Dex), Bluff (Cha), Climb (Str), Concentration (Con),
Craft (Int), Decipher Script (Int), Diplomacy (Cha), Disguise (Cha),
Escape Artist (Dex), Gather Information (Cha), Hide (Dex), Jump
(Str), Knowledge (all skills, taken individually) (Int), Listen (Wis),
Move Silently (Dex), Perform (Cha), Profession (Wis), Sense Motive
(Wis), Sleight of Hand (Dex), Speak Language (n/a), Spellcraft (Int),
Swim (Str), Tumble (Dex), and Use Magic Device (Cha). See
Chapter 4: Skills for skill descriptions.
Skill Points at 1st Level: (6 + Int modifier) × 4.
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 6 + Int modifier.
Class Features
All of the following are class features of the bard.
Weapon and Armor Proficiency: A bard is proficient with all
simple weapons, plus the longsword, rapier, sap, short sword,
shortbow, and whip. Bards are proficient with light armor and
shields (except tower shields).
Because the somatic components required for bard spells are
relatively simple, a bard can cast bard spells while wearing light
armor without incurring the normal arcane spell failure chance.
However, like any other arcane spellcaster, a bard wearing medium
or heavy armor or using a shield incurs a chance of arcane spell
failure if the spell in question has a somatic component (most do). A
multiclass bard still incurs the normal arcane spell failure chance for
arcane spells received from other classes.
Spells: A bard casts arcane spells (the same type of spells available
to sorcerers and wizards), which are drawn from the bard spell (page
181) list. He can cast any spell he knows without preparing it ahead
of time, the way a wizard or cleric must (see below). Every bard spell
has a verbal component (singing, reciting, or music).
To learn or cast a spell, a bard must have a Charisma score equal to
at least 10 + the spell level (Cha 10 for 0-level spells, Cha 11 for 1stlevel spells, and so forth). The Difficulty Class for a saving throw
against a bard’s spell is 10 + the spell level + the bard’s Charisma
modifier.
Like other spellcasters, a bard can cast only a certain number of
spells of each spell level per day. His base daily spell allotment is
given on Table 3–4: The Bard. In addition, he receives bonus spells
per day if he has a high Charisma score (see Table 1–1: Ability
Modifiers and Bonus Spells, page 8). When Table 3–4 indicates that
the bard gets 0 spells per day of a given spell level (for instance, 1stlevel spells for a 2nd-level bard), he gains only the bonus spells he
would be entitled to based on his Charisma score for that spell level.
The bard’s selection of spells is extremely limited. A bard begins
play knowing four 0-level spells (also called cantrips) of your choice.
At most new bard levels, he gains one or more new spells, as
indicated on Table 3–5: Bard Spells Known. (Unlike spells per day,
the number of spells a bard knows is not affected by his Charisma
score; the numbers on Table 3–5 are fixed.)
Upon reaching 5th level, and at every third bard level after that
(8th, 11th, and so on), a bard can choose to learn a new spell in place
of one he already knows. In effect, the bard “loses” the old spell in
exchange for the new one. The new spell’s level must be the same as
that of the spell being exchanged, and it must be at least two levels
lower than the highest-level bard spell the bard can cast. For
instance, upon reaching 5th level, a bard could trade a single 0-level
spell (two spell levels below the highest-level bard spell he can cast,
which is 2nd) for a different 0-level spell. At 8th level, he could trade
in a single 0-level or 1st-level spell (since he now can cast 3rd-level
bard spells) for a different spell of the same level. A bard may swap
only a single spell at any given level, and must choose whether or
not to swap the spell at the same time that he gains new spells
known for the level.
As noted above, a bard need not prepare his spells in advance. He
can cast any spell he knows at any time, assuming he has not yet
used up his allotment of spells per day for the spell’s level. For
example, at 1st level, Gimble the bard can cast two 0-level spells per
day for being 1st level (see Table 3–4: The Bard). However, he knows
four 0-level spells: detect magic, ghost sound, light, and read magic (see
Table 3–5: Bard Spells Known). Thus, on any given day, he can cast
some combination of those four spells a total of two times. He does
not have to decide ahead of time which spells he’ll cast.
Bardic Knowledge: A bard picks up a lot of stray knowledge
while wandering the land and learning stories from other bards. He
may make a special bardic knowledge check with a bonus equal to
his bard level + his Intelligence modifier to see whether he knows
some relevant information about local notable people, legendary
items, or noteworthy places. (If the bard has 5 or more ranks in
Knowledge (history), he gains a +2 bonus on this check.)
DC Type of Knowledge Examples
10 Common, known by at least A local mayor’s reputation for
 a substantial minority drinking; common legends
 of the local population. about a powerful place of
 mystery.
20 Uncommon but available, A local priest’s shady past;
 known by only a few people legends about a powerful
 in the area. Magic item.
25 Obscure, known by few, A knight’s family history;
 hard to come by. legends about a minor place
 of mystery or magic item
30 Extremely obscure, known A mighty wizard’s childhood
 by very few, possibly forgotten nickname; the history of a
 by most who once knew petty magic item.
 it, possibly known only by
 those who don’t understand
 the significance of the knowledge.
A successful bardic knowledge check will not reveal the powers
of a magic item but may give a hint as to its general function. A bard
may not take 10 or take 20 on this check; this sort of knowledge is
essentially random. The DM can determine the Difficulty Class of
the check by referring to the table above.
Bardic Music: Once per day per bard level, a bard can use his
song or poetics to produce magical effects on those around him
(usually including himself, if desired). While these abilities fall
under the category of bardic music and the descriptions discuss
singing or playing instruments, they can all be activated by reciting
poetry, chanting, singing lyrical songs, singing melodies (fa-la-la,
and so forth), whistling, playing an instrument, or playing an
instrument in combination with some spoken performance. Each
ability requires both a minimum bard level and a minimum number
of ranks in the Perform skill to qualify; if a bard does not have the
required number of ranks in at least one Perform skill, he does not
gain the bardic music ability until he acquires the needed ranks.
Starting a bardic music effect is a standard action. Some bardic
music abilities require concentration, which means the bard must
take a standard action each round to maintain the ability. Even
while using bardic music that doesn’t require concentration, a bard
cannot cast spells, activate magic items by spell completion (such as
scrolls), or activate magic items by magic word (such as wands). Just
as for casting a spell with a verbal component (see Components,
page 174), a deaf bard has a 20% chance to fail when attempting to
use bardic music. If he fails, the attempt still counts against his daily
limit.
Countersong (Su): A bard with 3 or more ranks in a Perform skill
can use his music or poetics to counter magical effects that depend
on sound (but not spells that simply have verbal components). Each
round of the countersong, he makes a Perform check. Any creature
within 30 feet of the bard (including the bard himself ) that is
affected by a sonic or language-dependent magical attack (such as a
sound burst or command spell) may use the bard’s Perform check
result in place of its saving throw if, after the saving throw is rolled,
the Perform check result proves to be higher. If a creature within
range of the countersong is already under the effect of a noninstantaneous sonic or language-dependent magical attack, it gains
another saving throw against the effect each round it hears the
countersong, but it must use the bard’s Perform check result for the
save. Countersong has no effect against effects that don’t allow saves.
The bard may keep up the countersong for 10 rounds.
Fascinate (Sp): A bard with 3 or more ranks in a Perform skill can
use his music or poetics to cause one or more creatures to become
fascinated with him. Each creature to be fascinated must be within
90 feet, able to see and hear the bard, and able to pay attention to
him. The bard must also be able to see the creature. The distraction
of a nearby combat or other dangers prevents the ability from
working. For every three levels a bard attains beyond 1st, he can
target one additional creature with a single use of this ability (two at
4th level, three at 7th level, and so on).
To use the ability, a bard makes a Perform check. His check result
is the DC for each affected creature’s Will save against the effect. If a
creature’s saving throw succeeds, the bard cannot attempt to
fascinate that creature again for 24 hours. If its saving throw fails,
the creature sits quietly and listens to the song, taking no other
actions, for as long as the bard continues to play and concentrate (up
to a maximum of 1 round per bard level). While fascinated, a target
takes a –4 penalty on skill checks made as reactions, such as Listen
and Spot checks. Any potential threat requires the bard to make
another Perform check and allows the creature a new saving throw
against a DC equal to the new Perform check result. Any obvious
threat, such as someone drawing a weapon, casting a spell, or aiming
a ranged weapon at the target, automatically breaks the effect.
Fascinate is an enchantment (compulsion), mind-affecting ability.
Inspire Courage (Su): A bard with 3 or more ranks in a Perform skill
can use song or poetics to inspire courage in his allies (including
himself ), bolstering them against fear and improving their combat
abilities. To be affected, an ally must be able to hear the bard sing.
The effect lasts for as long as the ally hears the bard sing and for 5
rounds thereafter. An affected ally receives a +1 morale bonus on
saving throws against charm and fear effects and a +1 morale bonus
on attack and weapon damage rolls. At 8th level, and every six bard
levels thereafter, this bonus increases by 1 (+2 at 8th, +3 at 14th, and
+4 at 20th). Inspire courage is a mind-affecting ability.
Inspire Competence (Su): A bard of 3rd level or higher with 6 or
more ranks in a Perform skill can use his music or poetics to help an
ally succeed at a task. The ally must be within 30 feet and able to see
and hear the bard. The bard must also be able to see the ally.
Depending on the task that the ally has at hand, the bard may use his
bardic music to lift the ally’s spirits, to help him or her focus
mentally, or in some other way. The ally gets a +2 competence bonus
on skill checks with a particular skill as long as he or she continues
to hear the bard’s music. The DM may rule that certain uses of this
ability are infeasible—chanting to make a rogue move more quietly,
for example, is self-defeating. The effect lasts as long as the bard
concentrates, up to a maximum of 2 minutes. A bard can’t inspire
competence in himself. Inspire competence is a mind-affecting
ability.
Suggestion (Sp): A bard of 6th level or higher with 9 or more ranks
in a Perform skill can make a suggestion (as the spell) to a creature
that he has already fascinated (see above). Using this ability does not
break the bard’s concentration on the fascinate effect, nor does it
allow a second saving throw against the fascinate effect. Making a
suggestion doesn’t count against a bard’s daily limit on bardic music
performances. A Will saving throw (DC 10 + 1/2 bard’s level + bard’s
Cha modifier) negates the effect. This ability affects only a single
creature (but see mass suggestion, below). Suggestion is an enchantment (compulsion), mind-affecting, language dependent ability.
Inspire Greatness (Su): A bard of 9th level or higher with 12 or more
ranks in a Perform skill can use music or poetics to inspire greatness
in himself or a single willing ally within 30 feet, granting him or her
extra fighting capability. For every three levels a bard attains beyond
9th, he can target one additional ally with a single use of this ability
(two at 12th level, three at 15th, four at 18th). To inspire greatness, a
bard must sing and an ally must hear him sing. The effect lasts for as
long as the ally hears the bard sing and for 5 rounds thereafter. A
creature inspired with greatness gains 2 bonus Hit Dice (d10s), the
commensurate number of temporary hit points (apply the target’s
Constitution modifier, if any, to these bonus Hit Dice), a +2
competence bonus on attack rolls, and a +1 competence bonus on
Fortitude saves. The bonus Hit Dice count as regular Hit Dice for
determining the effect of spells such as sleep. Inspire greatness is a
mind-affecting ability.
Song of Freedom (Sp): A bard of 12th level or higher with 15 or
more ranks in a Perform skill can use music or poetics to create an
effect equivalent to the break enchantment spell (caster level equals
the character’s bard level). Using this ability requires 1 minute of
uninterrupted concentration and music, and it functions on a single
target within 30 feet. A bard can’t use song of freedom on himself.
Inspire Heroics (Su): A bard of 15th level or higher with 18 or more
ranks in a Perform skill can use music or poetics to inspire
tremendous heroism in himself or a single willing ally within 30
feet, allowing that creature to fight bravely even against overwhelming odds. For every three bard levels the character attains
beyond 15th, he can inspire heroics in one additional creature. To
inspire heroics, a bard must sing and an ally must hear the bard sing
for a full round. A creature so inspired gains a +4 morale bonus on
saving throws and a +4 dodge bonus to AC. The effect lasts for as 
ong as the ally hears the bard sing and for up to 5 rounds thereafter.
Inspire heroics is a mind-affecting ability.
Mass Suggestion (Sp): This ability functions like suggestion, above,
except that a bard of 18th level or higher with 21 or more ranks in a
Perform skill can make the suggestion simultaneously to any number
of creatures that he has already fascinated (see above). Mass suggestion
is an enchantment (compulsion), mind-affecting, language-dependent ability.
Ex-Bards
A bard who becomes lawful in alignment cannot progress in levels
as a bard, though he retains all his bard abilities. 

CLERIC
The handiwork of the gods is everywhere—in places of natural
beauty, in mighty crusades, in soaring temples, and in the hearts of
worshipers. Like people, gods run the gamut from benevolent to
malicious, reserved to intrusive, simple to inscrutable. The gods,
however, work mostly through intermediaries—their clerics. Good
clerics heal, protect, and avenge. Evil clerics pillage, destroy, and
sabotage. A cleric uses the power of his god to make his god’s will
manifest. And if a cleric uses his god’s power to improve his own lot,
that’s to be expected, too.
Adventures: Ideally, a cleric’s adventures support his god’s
causes, at least in a general way. A good cleric, for example, helps
those in need. If, through noble acts, he can improve the reputation
to his god or temple, that’s even better. An evil cleric seeks to
increase his own power and that of his deity, so that others will
respect and fear both.
Clerics sometimes receive orders, or at least suggestions, from
their ecclesiastical superiors, directing them to undertake missions
for the church. The clerics and their companions are compensated
fairly for these missions, and the church may be especially generous
with the casting of needed spells or divine magic items as payment.
Of course, clerics are people, too, and they may have any or all the
more common motivations for adventuring.
Characteristics: Clerics are masters of divine magic, which is
especially good at healing. Even an inexperienced cleric can bring
people back from the brink of death, and an experienced cleric can
bring back people who have crossed over that brink.
As channelers of divine energy, clerics can affect undead creatures. A good cleric can turn away or even destroy undead; an evil
cleric can bring undead under his control.
Clerics have some combat training. They can use simple weapons,
and they are trained in the use of armor, since armor does not
interfere with divine spells the way it does with arcane spells.
Alignment: Like the gods they serve, clerics can be of any
alignment. Because people more readily worship good deities than
neutral or evil ones, there are more good than evil clerics. Clerics
also tend toward law instead of chaos, since lawful religions tend to
be more structured and better able to recruit and train clerics than
chaotic ones.
Typically, a cleric is the same alignment as his deity, though some
clerics are one step away from their respective deities in alignment.
For example, most clerics of Heironeous, the god of valor (who is
lawful good) are lawful good, but some are lawful neutral or neutral
good. Additionally, a cleric may not be neutral (that is, neutral on
both the good–evil axis and the lawful–chaotic axis) unless his deity
is neutral.
Religion: Every reasonably well-known deity has clerics devoted
to him or her, so clerics can be of any religion. The deity most
common worshiped by human clerics in civilized lands is Pelor (god
of the sun). The majority of nonhuman clerics are devoted to the
chief god of the appropriate racial pantheon. Most clerics are
officially ordained members of religious organizations, commonly
called churches. Each has sworn to uphold the ideals of his church.
Some clerics devote themselves not to a god but to a cause or a
source of divine power. These characters wield magic the way clerics
devoted to individual gods do, but they are not associated with any
religious institution or any particular practice of worship. A cleric
devoted to good and law, for example, may be on friendly terms with
the clerics of lawful and good deities and may extol the virtues of a
good and lawful life, but he is not a functionary in a church
hierarchy.
Background: Most clerics join their churches as young adults,
though some are devoted to a god’s service from a young age, and a
few feel the call later in life. While some clerics are tightly bound to
their churches’ activities on a daily basis, others have more freedom
to conduct their lives as they please, as long as they do so in
accordance with their gods’ wishes.
Clerics of a given religion are all supposed to get along, though
schisms within a church are often more bitter than conflicts
between religions. Clerics who share some basic ideals, such as
goodness or lawfulness, may find common cause with each other
and see themselves as part of an order or body that supersedes any
given religion. Clerics of opposed goals, however, are sworn enemies. In civilized lands, open warfare between religions occurs only
during civil wars and similar social upheavals, but vicious
politicking between opposed churches is common.
Races: All the common races are represented in this class, since
the need for religion and divine magic is universal. The clerics of
most races, however, are too focused on their religious duties to
undertake an adventurer’s life. Crusading, adventuring clerics most
often come from the human and dwarf races.
Among the savage humanoids, clerics are less common. The
exception is troglodytes, who take well to divine magic and are often
led by priests, who make a practice of sacrificing and devouring
captives.
Other Classes: In an adventuring party, the cleric is everybody’s
friend and often the glue that holds the party together. As the one
who can channel divine energy, a cleric is a capable healer, and
adventurers of every class appreciate being put back together after
they’ve taken some hard knocks. Clerics sometimes clash with
druids, since druids represent an older, more primal relationship
between the mortal and the divine. Mostly, though, the
religion of a cleric determines how he gets along with
others. A cleric of Olidammara (god of thieves), gets along
fine with rogues and ne’er-do-wells, for example,
while a cleric of Heironeous (god of valor)
rankles at such company.
Role: The cleric serves as a typical group’s
primary healer, diviner, and defensive
specialist. He can hold his own in a fight
but usually isn’t well served by charging to
the front of combat. The cleric’s domains and
spell selection can greatly affect his role as
well.
GAME RULE INFORMATION
Clerics have the following game statistics.
Abilities: Wisdom determines how
powerful a spell a cleric can cast, how many
spells he can cast per day, and how hard those
spells are to resist (see Spells, below). A high
Constitution score improves a cleric’s hit
points, and a high Charisma score
improves his ability to turn undead.
Alignment: A cleric’s alignment must
be within one step of his deity’s (that is, it
may be one step away on either the
lawful–chaotic axis or the good–evil
axis, but not both). Exceptions are
the clerics of St. Cuthbert (a
lawful neutral deity), who may
choose only between lawful good
and lawful neutral for their
alignment. A cleric may not
be neutral unless his deity’s
alignment is also neutral.
Hit Die: d8.
Class Skills
The cleric’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are
Concentration (Con), Craft (Int), Diplomacy (Cha), Heal (Wis),
Knowledge (arcana) (Int), Knowledge (history) (Int), Knowledge
(religion) (Int), Knowledge (the planes) (Int), Profession (Wis), and
Spellcraft (Int). See Chapter 4: Skills for skill descriptions.
Domains and Class Skills: A cleric who chooses the Animal
or Plant domain adds Knowledge (nature) (Int) to the cleric class
skills listed above. A cleric who chooses the Knowledge domain
adds all Knowledge (Int) skills to the list.
A cleric who chooses the Travel domain
adds Survival (Wis) to the list. A cleric who
chooses the Trickery domain adds Bluff
(Cha), Disguise (Cha), and Hide (Dex) to the
list. See Deity, Domains, and Domain Spells,
below, for more information.
Skill Points at 1st Level: (2 + Int modifier) × 4.
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 2 + Int
modifier.
Class Features
All of the following are class features of the cleric.
Weapon and Armor Proficiency: Clerics are
proficient with all simple weapons, with all types of
armor (light, medium, and heavy), and
with shields (except tower
shields).
Every deity has a favored
weapon (see Deities, page 106),
and his or her clerics consider it
a point of pride to wield that
weapon. A cleric who chooses
the War domain receives the
Weapon Focus feat related to that
weapon as a bonus feat. He also
receives the appropriate Martial
Weapon Proficiency feat as a bonus
feat, if the weapon falls into that
category. See Chapter 5: Feats for
details.
Aura (Ex): A cleric of a chaotic, evil, good, or lawful deity has a
particularly powerful aura corresponding to the deity’s alignment
(see the detect evil spell for details). Clerics who don’t worship a specific deity but choose the Chaotic, Evil, Good, or Lawful domain
have a similarly powerful aura of the corresponding alignment.
Spells: A cleric casts divine spells (the same type of spells available to the druid, paladin, and ranger), which are drawn from the
cleric spell list (page 183). However, his alignment may restrict him
from casting certain spells opposed to his moral or ethical beliefs;
see Chaotic, Evil, Good, and Lawful Spells, below. A cleric must
choose and prepare his spells in advance (see below).
To prepare or cast a spell, a cleric must have a Wisdom score equal
to at least 10 + the spell level (Wis 10 for 0-level spells, Wis 11 for
1st-level spells, and so forth). The Difficulty Class for a saving throw
against a cleric’s spell is 10 + the spell level + the cleric’s Wisdom
modifier.
Like other spellcasters, a cleric can cast only a certain number of
spells of each spell level per day. His base daily spell allotment is
given on Table 3–7: The Cleric. In addition, he receives bonus spells
per day if he has a high Wisdom score (see Table 1–1: Ability
Modifiers and Bonus Spells, page 8). A cleric also gets one domain
spell of each spell level he can cast, starting at 1st level. When a
cleric prepares a spell in a domain spell slot, it must come from one
of his two domains (see Deities, Domains, and Domain Spells,
below).
Clerics do not acquire their spells from books or scrolls, nor do
they prepare them through study. Instead, they meditate or pray for
their spells, receiving them through their own strength of faith or as
divine inspiration. Each cleric must choose a time at which he must
spend 1 hour each day in quiet contemplation or supplication to
regain his daily allotment of spells. Typically, this hour is at dawn or
noon for good clerics and at dusk or midnight for evil ones. Time
spent resting has no effect on whether a cleric can prepare spells. A
cleric may prepare and cast any spell on the cleric spell list (page
183), provided that he can cast spells of that level, but he must
choose which spells to prepare during his daily meditation.
Deity, Domains, and Domain Spells: Choose a deity for your
cleric. Sample deities are listed on Table 3–7: Deities and described
on page 106–108. The cleric’s deity influences his alignment, what
magic he can perform, his values, and how others see him. You may
also choose for your cleric to have no deity.
If the typical worshipers of a deity include the members of a race,
a cleric must be of the indicated race to choose that deity as his own.
(The god may have occasional worshipers of other races, but not
clerics.)
When you have chosen an alignment and a deity for your cleric,
choose two domains from among those given on Table 3–7 for the
deity. While the clerics of a particular religion are united in their
reverence for their deity, each cleric emphasizes different aspects of
the deity’s interests. You can select an alignment domain (Chaos,
Evil, Good, or Law) for your cleric only if his alignment matches that
domain.
If your cleric is not devoted to a particular deity, you still select
two domains to represent his spiritual inclinations and abilities. The
restriction on alignment domains still applies.
Each domain gives your cleric access to a domain spell at each
spell level he can cast, from 1st on up, as well as a granted power.
Your cleric gets the granted powers of both the domains selected.
With access to two domain spells at a given spell level, a cleric
prepares one or the other each day in his domain spell slot. If a
domain spell is not on the cleric spell list (page 183), a cleric can
prepare it only in his domain spell slot. Domain spells and granted
powers are given in Cleric Domains, pages 185–189.
For example, Jozan is a 1st-level cleric of Pelor. He chooses Good
and Healing (from Pelor’s domain options) as his two domains. He
gets the granted powers of both his selected domains. The Good
domain allows him to cast all spells with the good descriptor at +1
caster level (as if he were one level higher as a cleric) as a granted
power, and it gives him access to protection from evil as a 1st-level
domain spell. The Healing domain allows him to cast all healing
subschool spells of the conjuration school at +1 caster level as a
granted power, and it gives him access to cure light wounds as a 1stlevel domain spell. When Jozan prepares his spells, he gets one 1stlevel spell for being a 1st-level cleric, one bonus 1st-level spell for
having a high Wisdom score (15), and one domain spell. The
domain spell must be one of the two to which he has access, either
protection from evil or cure light wounds.
Spontaneous Casting: A good cleric (or a neutral cleric of a
good deity) can channel stored spell energy into healing spells that
the cleric did not prepare ahead of time. The cleric can “lose” any
prepared spell that is not a domain spell in order to cast any cure
spell of the same spell level or lower (a cure spell is any spell with
“cure” in its name). For example, a good cleric who has prepared
command (a 1st-level spell) may lose command in order to cast cure
light wounds (also a 1st-level spell). Clerics of good deities can cast
cure spells in this way because they are especially proficient at
wielding positive energy.
An evil cleric (or a neutral cleric of an evil deity), on the other
hand, can’t convert prepared spells to cure spells but can convert
them to inflict spells (an inflict spell is one with “inflict” in its name).
A cleric who is neither good nor evil and whose deity is neither
good nor evil can convert spells to either cure spells or inflict spells
(player’s choice), depending on whether the cleric is more proficient
at wielding positive or negative energy. Once the player makes this
choice, it cannot be reversed. This choice also determines whether
the cleric turns or commands undead (see below). Exceptions: All
lawful neutral clerics of Wee Jas (goddess of death and magic)
convert prepared spells to inflict spells, not cure spells. All clerics of
St. Cuthbert (god of retribution) and all nonevil clerics of Obad-Hai
(god of nature) convert prepared spells to cure spells, not inflict spells.
Chaotic, Evil, Good, and Lawful Spells: A cleric can’t cast spells
of an alignment opposed to his own or his deity’s (if he has one). For
example, a good cleric (or a neutral cleric of a good deity) cannot cast
evil spells. Spells associated with particular alignments are indicated
by the chaos, evil, good, and law descriptors in their spell
descriptions (see Chapter 11: Spells).
Turn or Rebuke Undead (Su): Any cleric, regardless of alignment, has the power to affect undead creatures (such as skeletons,
zombies, ghosts, and vampires) by channeling the power of his faith
through his holy (or unholy) symbol (see Turn or Rebuke Undead,
page 159).
A good cleric (or a neutral cleric who worships a good deity) can
turn or destroy undead creatures. An evil cleric (or a neutral cleric
who worships an evil deity) instead rebukes or commands such
creatures., forcing them to cower in awe of his power. If your
character is a neutral cleric of a neutral deity, you must choose
whether his turning ability functions as that of a good cleric or an
evil cleric. Once you make this choice, it cannot be reversed. This
decision also determines whether the cleric can cast spontaneous
cure or inflict spells (see above). Exceptions: All lawful neutral clerics of
Wee Jas (goddess of death and magic) rebuke or command undead.
All clerics of St. Cuthbert (god of retribution) and all nonevil clerics
of Obad-Hai (god of nature) turn of destroy undead.
A cleric may attempt to turn undead a number of times per day
equal to 3 + his Charisma modifier. A cleric with 5 or more ranks in
Knowledge (religion) gets a +2 bonus on turning checks against
undead.
Bonus Languages: A cleric’s bonus language options include
Celestial, Abyssal, and Infernal (the languages of good, chaotic evil,
and lawful evil outsiders, respectively). These choices are in addition
to the bonus languages available to the character because of his race
(see Race and Languages, page 12, and the Speak Language skill,
page 82).
Ex-Clerics
A cleric who grossly violates the code of conduct required by his god
(generally by acting in ways opposed to the god’s alignment or
purposes) loses all spells and class features, except for armor and
shield proficiencies and proficiency with simple weapons. He
cannot thereafter gain levels as a cleric of that god until he atones
(see the atonement spell description, page 201). 

DRUID
The fury of a storm, the gentle strength of the morning sun, the
cunning of the fox, the power of the bear—all these and more are at
the druid’s command. The druid however, claims no mastery over
nature. That claim, she says, is the empty boast of a city dweller. The
druid gains her power not by ruling nature but by being at one with
it. To trespassers in a druid’s sacred grove, and to those who feel her
wrath, the distinction is overly fine.
Adventures: Druids adventure to gain knowledge (especially
about animals and plants unfamiliar to them) and power. Sometimes, their superiors call on their services. Druids may also bring
their power to bear against those who threaten what they love,
which more often includes ancient stands of trees or trackless
mountains than people. While druids accept that which is horrific
or cruel in nature, they hate that which is unnatural, including
aberrations (such as beholders and carrion crawlers) and undead
(such as zombies and vampires). Druids sometimes lead raids against
such creatures, especially when they encroach on the druids’
territory.
Characteristics: Druids cast divine spells much the same way
clerics do, though most get their spells from the power of nature
rather than from deities. Their spells are oriented toward nature and
animals. In addition to spells, druids gain an increasing array of
magical powers, including the ability to take the shapes of animals,
as they advance in level.
The armor of a druid are restricted by traditional oaths to the
items noted in Weapon and Armor proficiency (below),All other
armor is prohibited. Though a druid could learn to wear full plate,
putting it on would violate her oath and suppress her druidic
powers.
Druids avoid carrying much worked metal with them because it
interferes with the pure and primal nature that they attempt to
embody.
Alignment: Druids, in keeping with nature’s ultimate indifference, must maintain at least some measure of dispassion. As such,
they must be neutral on at least one alignment axis (chaotic–lawful
or good–evil), if not both. Just as nature encompasses such
dichotomies as life and death, beauty and horror, and peace and
violence, so two druids can manifest different or even opposite
alignments (neutral good and neutral evil, for instance) and still be
part of the druidic tradition.
Religion: A druid reveres nature above all. She gains her magical
power either from the force of nature itself or from a nature deity.
The typical druid pursues a mystic spirituality of transcendent union
with nature rather than devoting herself to a divine entity. Still,
some druids revere or at least respect either Obad-Hai (god of
nature) or Ehlonna (goddess of the woodlands).
Background: Though their organization is invisible to most
outsiders, who consider druids to be loners, druids are actually part
of a society that spans the land, ignoring political borders. A
prospective druid is inducted into this society through secret rituals,
including tests that not all survive. Only after achieving some level
of competence is the druid allowed to strike out on her own.
All druids are nominally members of this druidic society, though
some individuals are so isolated that they have never seen any highranking members of the society or participated in druidic
gatherings. All druids recognize each other as brothers and sisters.
Like true creatures of the wilderness, however, druids sometimes
compete with or even prey on each other.
A druid may be expected to perform services for
higher-ranking druids, though proper payment is
tendered for such assignments. Likewise, a
lower-ranking druid may appeal for aid from
her higher-ranking comrades in exchange for a
fair price in coin or service.
Druids may live in small towns, but they always
spend a good portion of their time in wild
areas. Even large cities surrounded by
cultivated land as far as the eye can see often
have druid groves nearby—small, wild
refuges where druids live and which they
protect fiercely. Near coastal cities, such
refuges may be nearby islands, where the
druids can find the isolation they need.
Races: Elves and gnomes have an
affinity for natural lands and often
become druids. Humans and halfelves also frequently adopt this path,
and druids are particularly common
among savage humans. Dwarves,
halflings, and half-orcs are
rarely druids.
Few from among the
brutal humanoids are
inducted into druidic society, though
gnolls have a fair
contingent of evil
druids among them.
Gnoll druids are
accepted, though perhaps not
welcomed, by druids of other races.
Other Classes: The druid shares with rangers and
many barbarians a reverence for nature and a familiarity with
natural lands. She doesn’t much understand the urban mannerism
typical of a rogue, and she finds arcane magic disruptive and slightly
distasteful. The typical druid also dislikes the paladin’s devotion to
abstract ideals instead of “the real world.” Druids, however, are
nothing if not accepting of diversity, and they take little offense at
other characters, even those very different from them.
Role: The druid enjoys extraordinary versatility. Though she
lacks the sheer healing power of the cleric, she makes up for it with
additional offensive power, thanks to her spell selection and wild
shape ability. A druid back up by another secondary healer (such as a
paladin) can prove extremely valuable to a group of adventurers. Her
animal companion also provides valuable melee combat support.
GAME RULE INFORMATION
Druids have the following game statistics.
Abilities: Wisdom determines how powerful a spell a druid can
cast, how many spells she can cast per day, and how hard those
spells are to resist. To cast a spell, a druid must have a Wisdom score
of 10 + the spell’s level. A druid gets bonus spells based on Wisdom.
The Difficulty Class of a saving throw against a druid’s spell is 10 +
the spell’s level + the druid’s Wisdom modifier.
Since a druid wears light or medium armor, a high Dexterity
score greatly improves her defensive ability.
Alignment: Neutral good, lawful neutral, neutral, chaotic
neutral, or neutral evil.
Hit Die: d8.
Class Skills
The druid’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are
Concentration (Con), Craft (Int),
Diplomacy (Cha), Handle Animal
(Cha), Heal (Wis), Knowledge
(nature) (Int), Listen (Wis),
Profession (Wis), Ride (Dex), Spellcraft
(Int), Spot (Wis), Survival (Wis), and Swim
(Str). See Chapter 4: Skills for skill
descriptions.
Skill Points at 1st Level: (4 + Int
modifier) × 4.
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 4
+ Int modifier.
Class Features
All of the following are class features of the
druid.
Weapon and Armor Proficiency:
Druids are proficient with the
following weapons: club, dagger,
dart, quarterstaff, scimitar, sickle,
shortspear, sling, and spear.
They are also proficient with all
natural attacks (claw, bite, and so forth)
of any form they assume with wild shape (see
below).
Druids are proficient with light and
medium armor but are prohibited from wearing
metal armor; thus, they may wear only padded,
leather, or hide armor. (A druid may also
wear wooden armor that has been
altered by the ironwood spell so that it
functions as though it were steel. See the
ironwood spell description, page 246) Druids are
proficient with shields (except tower shields) but must use only
wooden ones.
A druid who wears prohibited armor or carries a prohibited shield
is unable to cast druid spells or use any of her supernatural or spelllike class abilities while doing so and for 24 hours thereafter.
Spells: A druid casts divine spells (the same type of spells
available to the cleric, paladin, and ranger), which are drawn from
the druid spell list (page 189). Her alignment may restrict her from
casting certain spells opposed to her moral or ethical beliefs; see
Chaotic, Evil, Good, and Lawful Spells, below. A druid must choose
and prepare her spells in advance (see below).
To prepare or cast a spell, the druid must have a Wisdom score
equal to at least 10 + the spell level (Wis 10 for 0-level spells, Wis 11
for 1st-level spells, and so forth). The Difficulty Class for a saving
throw against a druid’s spell is 10 + the spell level + the druid’s
Wisdom modifier.
Like other spellcasters, a druid can cast only a certain number of
spells of each spell level per day. Her base daily spell allotment is
given on Table 3–8: The Druid. In addition, she receives bonus
spells per day if she has a high Wisdom score (see Table 1–1: Ability
Modifiers and Bonus Spells, page8). She does not have access to any
domain spells or granted powers, as a cleric does.
Illus. by S. Wood
Vadania
CHAPTER 3:
CLASSES
35
A druid prepares and casts spells the way a cleric does, though she
cannot lose a prepared spell to cast a cure spell in its place (but see
Spontaneous Casting, below). A druid may prepare and cast any spell
on the druid spell list (page 189), provided that she can cast spells of
that level, but she must choose which spells to prepare during her
daily meditation.
Spontaneous Casting: A druid can channel stored spell energy
into summoning spells that she hasn’t prepared ahead of time. She
can “lose” a prepared spell in order to cast any summon nature’s ally
spell of the same level or lower. For example, a druid who has
prepared repel vermin (a 4th-level spell) may lose repel vermin in order
to cast summon nature’s ally IV (also a 4th-level spell).
Chaotic, Evil, Good, and Lawful Spells: A druid can’t cast spells
of an alignment opposed to her own or her deity’s (if she has one).
For example, a neutral good druid cannot cast evil spells. Spells
associated with particular alignments are indicated by the chaos,
evil, good, and law descriptors in their spell descriptions (see
Chapter 11: Spells).
Bonus Languages: A druid’s bonus language options include
Sylvan, the language of woodland creatures. This choice is in
addition to the bonus languages available to the character because of
her race (see Race and Languages, page 12, and the Speak Language
skill, page 82).
A druid also knows Druidic, a secret language known only to
druids, which she learns upon becoming a 1st-level druid. Druidic is
a free language for a druid; that is, she knows it in addition to her
regular allotment of languages and it doesn’t take up a language slot.
Druids are forbidden to teach this language to nondruids. Druidic
has its own alphabet.
Animal Companion (Ex): A druid may begin play with an
animal companion selected from the following list: badger, camel,
dire rat, dog, riding dog, eagle, hawk, horse (light or heavy), owl,
pony, snake (Small or Medium viper), or wolf. If the DM’s campaign
takes place wholly or partly in an aquatic environment, the DM may
add the following creatures to the druid’s list of options: crocodile,
porpoise, Medium shark, and squid. This animal is a loyal
companion that accompanies the druid on her adventures as
appropriate for its kind.
A 1st-level druid’s companion is completely typical for its kind
except as noted in the sidebar on page 36. As a druid advances in
level, the animal’s power increases as shown on the table in the
sidebar.
If a druid releases her companion from service, she may gain a
new one by performing a ceremony requiring 24 uninterrupted
hours of prayer. This ceremony can also replace an animal companion that has perished.
A druid of 4th level or higher may select from alternative lists of
animals (see the sidebar). Should she select an animal companion
from one of these alternative lists, the creature gains abilities as if
the character’s druid level were lower than it actually is. Subtract the
value indicated in the appropriate list header from the character’s
druid level and compare the result with the druid level entry on the
table in the sidebar to determine the animal companion’s powers. (If
this adjustment would reduce the druid’s effective level to 0 or
lower, she can’t have that animal as a companion.) For example, a
6th-level druid could select a leopard as an animal companion. The
leopard would have characteristics and special abilities as if the
druid were 3rd level (taking into account the –3 adjustment) instead
of 6th level.
Nature Sense (Ex): A druid gains a +2 bonus on Knowledge
(nature) and Survival checks.
Wild Empathy (Ex): A druid can use body language, vocalizations, and demeanor to improve the attitude of an animal (such as a
bear or a monitor lizard). This ability functions just like a Diplomacy
check made to improve the attitude of a person (see Chapter 4:
Skills). The druid rolls 1d20 and adds her druid level and her
Charisma modifier to determine the wild empathy check result. The
typical domestic animal has a starting attitude of indifferent, while
wild animals are usually unfriendly.
To use wild empathy, the druid and the animal must be able to
study each other, which means that they must be within 30 feet of
one another under normal conditions. Generally, influencing an
animal in this way takes 1 minute but, as with influencing people, it
might take more or less time.
A druid can also use this ability to influence a magical beast with
an Intelligence score of 1 or 2 (such as a basilisk or a girallon), but
she takes a –4 penalty on the check.
Table 3–8: The Druid
 Base Fort Ref Will ———————————— Spells per D

A druid prepares and casts spells the way a cleric does, though she
cannot lose a prepared spell to cast a cure spell in its place (but see
Spontaneous Casting, below). A druid may prepare and cast any spell
on the druid spell list (page 189), provided that she can cast spells of
that level, but she must choose which spells to prepare during her
daily meditation.
Spontaneous Casting: A druid can channel stored spell energy
into summoning spells that she hasn’t prepared ahead of time. She
can “lose” a prepared spell in order to cast any summon nature’s ally
spell of the same level or lower. For example, a druid who has
prepared repel vermin (a 4th-level spell) may lose repel vermin in order
to cast summon nature’s ally IV (also a 4th-level spell).
Chaotic, Evil, Good, and Lawful Spells: A druid can’t cast spells
of an alignment opposed to her own or her deity’s (if she has one).
For example, a neutral good druid cannot cast evil spells. Spells
associated with particular alignments are indicated by the chaos,
evil, good, and law descriptors in their spell descriptions (see
Chapter 11: Spells).
Bonus Languages: A druid’s bonus language options include
Sylvan, the language of woodland creatures. This choice is in
addition to the bonus languages available to the character because of
her race (see Race and Languages, page 12, and the Speak Language
skill, page 82).
A druid also knows Druidic, a secret language known only to
druids, which she learns upon becoming a 1st-level druid. Druidic is
a free language for a druid; that is, she knows it in addition to her
regular allotment of languages and it doesn’t take up a language slot.
Druids are forbidden to teach this language to nondruids. Druidic
has its own alphabet.
Animal Companion (Ex): A druid may begin play with an
animal companion selected from the following list: badger, camel,
dire rat, dog, riding dog, eagle, hawk, horse (light or heavy), owl,
pony, snake (Small or Medium viper), or wolf. If the DM’s campaign
takes place wholly or partly in an aquatic environment, the DM may
add the following creatures to the druid’s list of options: crocodile,
porpoise, Medium shark, and squid. This animal is a loyal
companion that accompanies the druid on her adventures as
appropriate for its kind.
A 1st-level druid’s companion is completely typical for its kind
except as noted in the sidebar on page 36. As a druid advances in
level, the animal’s power increases as shown on the table in the
sidebar.
If a druid releases her companion from service, she may gain a
new one by performing a ceremony requiring 24 uninterrupted
hours of prayer. This ceremony can also replace an animal companion that has perished.
A druid of 4th level or higher may select from alternative lists of
animals (see the sidebar). Should she select an animal companion
from one of these alternative lists, the creature gains abilities as if
the character’s druid level were lower than it actually is. Subtract the
value indicated in the appropriate list header from the character’s
druid level and compare the result with the druid level entry on the
table in the sidebar to determine the animal companion’s powers. (If
this adjustment would reduce the druid’s effective level to 0 or
lower, she can’t have that animal as a companion.) For example, a
6th-level druid could select a leopard as an animal companion. The
leopard would have characteristics and special abilities as if the
druid were 3rd level (taking into account the –3 adjustment) instead
of 6th level.
Nature Sense (Ex): A druid gains a +2 bonus on Knowledge
(nature) and Survival checks.
Wild Empathy (Ex): A druid can use body language, vocalizations, and demeanor to improve the attitude of an animal (such as a
bear or a monitor lizard). This ability functions just like a Diplomacy
check made to improve the attitude of a person (see Chapter 4:
Skills). The druid rolls 1d20 and adds her druid level and her
Charisma modifier to determine the wild empathy check result. The
typical domestic animal has a starting attitude of indifferent, while
wild animals are usually unfriendly.
To use wild empathy, the druid and the animal must be able to
study each other, which means that they must be within 30 feet of
one another under normal conditions. Generally, influencing an
animal in this way takes 1 minute but, as with influencing people, it
might take more or less time.
A druid can also use this ability to influence a magical beast with
an Intelligence score of 1 or 2 (such as a basilisk or a girallon), but
she takes a –4 penalty on the check. 

Woodland Stride (Ex): Starting at 2nd level, a druid may move
through any sort of undergrowth (such as natural thorns, briars,
overgrown areas, and similar terrain) at her normal speed and without taking damage or suffering any other impairment. However,
thorns, briars, and overgrown areas that have been magically
manipulated to impede motion still affect her.
Trackless Step (Ex): Starting at 3rd level, a druid leaves no trail
in natural surroundings and cannot be tracked. She may choose to
leave a trail if so desired.
Resist Nature’s Lure (Ex): Starting at 4th level, a druid gains a
+4 bonus on saving throws against the spell-like abilities of fey (such
as dryads, pixies, and sprites).
Wild Shape (Su): At 5th level, a druid gains the ability to turn
herself into any Small or Medium animal and back again once per
day. Her options for new forms include all creatures with the animal
type (see the Monster Manual). This ability functions like the polymorph spell, except as noted here. The effect lasts for 1 hour per
druid level, or until she changes back. Changing form (to animal or
back) is a standard action and doesn’t provoke an attack of
opportunity.
The form chosen must be that of an animal the druid is familiar
with. For example, a druid who has never been outside a temperate
forest could not become a polar bear.
A druid loses her ability to speak while in animal form because
she is limited to the sounds that a normal, untrained animal can
make, but she can communicate normally with other animals of the
same general grouping as her new form. (The normal sound a wild
parrot makes is a squawk, so changing to this form does not permit
speech.)
A druid can use this ability more times per day at 6th, 7th, 10th,
14th, and 18th level, as noted on Table 3–8: The Druid. In addition,
she gains the ability to take the shape of a Large animal at 8th level, a
Tiny animal at 11th level, and a Huge animal at 15th level. The new
form’s Hit Dice can’t exceed the character’s druid level. For instance,
a druid can’t take the form of a dire bear (a Large creature that always
has at least 12 HD) until 12th level, even though she can begin
taking Large forms at 8th level.
At 12th level, a druid becomes able to use wild shape to change
into a plant creature, such as a shambling mound, with the
same size restrictions as for animal forms. (A druid can’t use
this ability to take the form of a plant that isn’t a creature,
such as a tree or a rose bush.)
At 16th level, a druid becomes able to use wild shape
to change into a Small, Medium, or Large elemental
(air, earth, fire, or water) once per day. These
elemental forms are in addition to her normal wild
shape usage. In addition to the normal effects of
wild shape, the druid gains all the elemental’s
extraordinary, supernatural, and spell-like abilities.
She also gains the elemental’s feats for as long as
she maintains the wild shape, but she retains her
own creature type (humanoid, in most cases).
At 18th level, a druid becomes able to assume
elemental form twice per day, and at 20th level
she can do so three times per day. At 20th
level, a druid may use this wild shape ability
to change into a Huge elemental.
Venom Immunity (Ex): At 9th level, a
druid gains immunity to all poisons.
A Thousand Faces (Su): At 13th level, a
druid gains the ability to change
her appearance at will, as if using
the alter self spell (page 197), but
only while in her normal form.
Timeless Body (Ex): After
attaining 15th level, a druid no
longer takes ability score
penalties for aging (see Table
6–5: Aging Effects, page 109) and
cannot be magically aged. Any penalties
she may have already incurred, however, remain in place. Bonuses
still accrue, and the druid still dies of old age when her time is up.
Ex-Druids
A druid who ceases to revere nature, changes to a prohibited
alignment, or teaches the Druidic language to a nondruid loses all
spells and druid abilities (including her animal companion, but not
including weapon, armor, and shield proficiencies). She cannot
thereafter gain levels as a druid until she atones (see the atonement
spell description, page 201).

THE DRUID’S ANIMAL COMPANION
A druid’s animal companion is different from a normal animal of its kind
in many ways. The companion is treated as a magical beast, not an
animal, for the purpose of all effects that depend on its type (though it
retains an animal’s HD, base attack bonus, saves, skill points, and feats).
It is superior to a normal animal of its kind and has special powers, as
described below.
Class Bonus Natural Str/Dex Bonus
Level HD Armor Adj. Adj. Tricks Special
1st–2nd +0 +0 +0 1 Link, share spells
3rd–5th +2 +2 +1 2 Evasion
6th–8th +4 +4 +2 3 Devotion
9th–11th +6 +6 +3 4 Multiattack
12th–14th +8 +8 +4 5
15th–17th +10 +10 +5 6 Improved evasion
18th–20th +12 +12 +6 7
Animal Companion Basics: Use the base statistics for a creature of the
companion’s kind, as given in the Monster Manual, but make the
following changes.
Class Level: The character’s druid level. The druid’s class levels stack
with levels of any other classes that are entitled to an animal companion
(such as the ranger) such for the purpose of determining the companion’s abilities and the alternative lists available to the character.
Bonus HD: Extra eight-sided (d8) Hit Dice, each of which gains a
Constitution modifier, as normal. Remember that extra Hit Dice improve
the animal companion’s base attack and base save bonuses. An animal
companion’s base attack bonus is the same as that of a druid of a level
equal to the animal’s HD. An animal companion has good Fortitude and
Reflex saves (treat it as a character whose level equals the animal’s HD).
An animal companion gains additional skill points and feats for bonus
HD as normal for advancing a monster’s Hit Dice (see the Monster
Manual).
Natural Armor Adj.: The number noted here is an improvement to the
animal companion’s existing natural armor bonus.
Str/Dex Adj.: Add this value to the animal companion’s Strength and
Dexterity scores.
Bonus Tricks: The value given in this column is the total number of
“bonus” tricks that the animal knows in addition to any that the druid
might choose to teach it (see the Handle Animal skill, page 74). These
bonus tricks don’t require any training time or Handle Animal checks,
and they don’t count against the normal limit of tricks known by the
animal. The druid selects these bonus tricks, and once selected, they
can’t be changed.
Link (Ex): A druid can handle her animal companion as a free action,
or push it as a move action, even if she doesn’t have any ranks in the
Handle Animal skill. The druid gains a +4 circumstance bonus on all wild
empathy checks and Handle Animal checks made regarding an animal
companion.
Share Spells (Ex): At the druid’s option, she may have any spell (but
not any spell-like ability) she casts upon herself also affect her animal
companion. The animal companion must be within 5 feet of her at the
time of casting to receive the benefit. If the spell or effect has a duration
other than instantaneous, it stops affecting the animal companion if the
companion moves farther than 5 feet away and will not affect the animal
again, even if it returns to the druid before the duration expires.
Additionally, the druid may cast a spell with a target of “You” on her
animal companion (as a touch range spell) instead of on herself. A druid
and her animal companion can share spells even if the spells normally
do not affect creatures of the companion’s type (animal).
Evasion (Ex): If an animal companion is subjected to an attack that
normally allows a Reflex saving throw for half damage, it takes no
damage if it makes a successful saving throw.
Devotion (Ex): An animal companion’s devotion to its master is so
complete that it gains a +4 morale bonus on Will saves against
enchantment spells and effects.
Multiattack: An animal companion gains Multiattack as a bonus feat if
it has three or more natural attacks (see the Monster Manual for details
on this feat) and does not already have that feat. If it does not have the
requisite three or more natural attacks, the animal companion instead
gains a second attack with its primary natural weapon, albeit at a –5
penalty.
Improved Evasion (Ex): When subjected to an attack that normally
allows a Reflex saving throw for half damage, an animal companion takes
no damage if it makes a successful saving throw and only half damage if
the saving throw fails.
ALTERNATIVE ANIMAL COMPANIONS
As explained in the text on page 35, a druid of sufficiently high level can
select her animal companion from one of the following lists, applying the
indicated adjustment to the druid’s level (in parentheses) for purposes
of determining the companion’s characteristics and special abilities.
4th Level or Higher (Level –3)
Ape (animal) Dire weasel
Bear, black (animal) Leopard (animal)
Bison (animal) Lizard, monitor (animal)
Boar (animal) Shark, Large1
 (animal)
Cheetah (animal) Snake, constrictor (animal)
Crocodile (animal)1
 Snake, Large viper (animal)
Dire badger Wolverine (animal)
Dire bat
7th Level or Higher (Level –6)
Bear, brown (animal) Dire wolverine
Crocodile, giant (animal) Elasmosaurus1
 (dinosaur)
Deinonychus (dinosaur) Lion (animal)
Dire ape Rhinoceros (animal)
Dire boar Snake, Huge viper (animal)
Dire wolf Tiger (animal)
10th Level or Higher (Level –9)
Bear, polar (animal) Shark, Huge1
 (animal)
Dire lion Snake, giant constrictor (animal)
Megaraptor (dinosaur) Whale, orca1
 (animal)
13th Level or Higher (Level –12)
Dire bear Elephant (animal)
Octopus, giant1
 (animal)
16th Level or Higher (Level –15)
Dire shark1
 Triceratops (dinosaur)
Dire tiger Tyrannosaurus (dinosaur)
Squid, giant1
 (animal)
1 Available only in an aquatic environment.

FIGHTER
The questing knight, the conquering
overlord, the king’s champion, the
elite foot soldier, the hardened
mercenary, and the bandit king—
all are fighters. Fighters can be
stalwart defenders of those in
need, cruel marauders, or gutsy
adventurers. Some are among
the land’s best souls, willing to
face death for the greater good.
Others are among the worst, with
no qualms about killing for private
gain, or even for sport. Fighters
who are not actively adventuring
may be soldiers, guards,
bodyguards, champions, or
criminal enforcers. An adventuring fighter might call himself a warrior, a
mercenary, a thug, or simply an adventurer.
Adventures: Most fighters see adventures, raids, and dangerous missions as
their job. Some have patrons who pay
them regularly. Others prefer to live
like prospectors, taking great risks in
hopes of the big haul. Some fighters are more
civic-minded and use their combat skills to protect endangered
people who cannot defend themselves. Whatever their initial
motivations, however, fighters often wind up living for the thrill of
combat and adventure.
Characteristics: Of all classes, fighters have the best all-around
fighting capabilities (hence the name). Fighters are familiar with all
the standard weapons and armors. In addition to general fighting
prowess, each fighter develops particular specialties of his own. A
given fighter may be especially capable with certain weapons,
another might be trained to execute specific fancy maneuvers. As
fighters gain experience, they get more opportunities to develop
their fighting skills. Thanks to their focus on combat maneuvers,
they can master the most difficult ones relatively quickly.
Alignment: Fighters may be of any alignment. Good fighters are
often crusading types who seek out and fight evil. Lawful fighters
may be champions who protect the land and its people. Chaotic
fighters may be wandering mercenaries. Evil fighters tend to be
bullies and petty villains who simply take what they want by
brute force.
Religion: Fighters often worship Heironeous (god of valor),
Kord (god of strength), St. Cuthbert (god of retribution),
Hextor (god of tyranny), or Erythnul (god of slaughter).
A fighter may style himself as a crusader in the
service of his god, or he may just want someone to
pray to before putting his life on the line yet
another time.
Background: Fighters come to their
profession in many ways. Most have had
formal training in a noble’s army or at
least in the local militia. Some have
trained in formal academies. Others are
self-taught—unpolished but well
tested. A fighter may have taken up the
sword as a way to escape
the limits of life on
the farm, or he may be
following a proud family
tradition. Fighters share no
special identity. They do not see
themselves as a group or
brotherhood. Those who hail from a
particular academy, mercenary company, or lord’s regiment, however, share a
certain camaraderie.
Races: Human fighters are usually
veterans of some military service, typically from
more mundane parents. Dwarf fighters are
commonly former members of the well-trained
strike teams that protect the underground
dwarven kingdoms. They are typically members
of warrior families that can trace their lineages
back for millennia, and they may have rivalries or
alliances with other dwarf fighters of a different
lineage. Elf fighters are typically skilled with the
longsword. They are proud of their ability at
swordplay and eager to demonstrate or test it.
Half-orc fighters are often selftaught outcasts who have achieved
enough skill to earn recognition and
something akin to respect. Gnome and
halfling fighters usually stay in their own communities as part of the
area militia rather than adventuring. Half-elves are rarely fighters,
but they may take up swordplay in honor of the elven tradition.
Among the brutal humanoids, few can manage the discipline it
takes to be a true fighter. The militaristic hobgoblins, however,
produce quite a number of strong and skilled fighters.
Other Classes: The fighter excels in a straight fight, but he relies
on others for magical support, healing, and scouting. On a team, it is
his job to man the front lines, protect the other party members, and
bring the tough opponents down. Fighters might not understand
the arcane ways of wizards or share the faith of clerics, but they
recognize the value of teamwork.
Role: In most adventuring parties, the fighter serves as a melee
combatant, charging into the fray while his comrades support him
with spells, ranged attacks, and other effects. Fighters who favor
ranged combat can prove very deadly, though without other melee
support, they can find themselves in front-line combat more often
than they might prefer.
GAME RULE INFORMATION
Fighters have the following game statistics.
Abilities: Strength is especially important for fighters because it
improves their melee attack and damage rolls. Constitution is
important for giving fighters lots of hit points, which they need in
their many battles. Dexterity is important for fighters who want
to be good archers or who want access to certain Dexterityoriented feats, but the heavy armor that fighters usually wear
reduces the benefit of a
very high Dexterity
score.
Alignment: Any.
Hit Die: d10.
Class Skills
The fighter’s class skills (and
the key ability for each skill)
are Climb (Str), Craft (Int),
Handle Animal (Cha),
Intimidate (Cha), Jump (Str),
Ride (Dex), and Swim (Str). See
Chapter 4: Skills for skill
descriptions.
Skill Points at 1st Level: (2 + Int
modifier) × 4.
Skill Points at Each Additional
Level: 2 + Int modifier.
Class Features
All of the following are class features of the
fighter.
Weapon and Armor Proficiency: A
fighter is proficient with all simple and
martial weapons and with all armor (heavy,
medium, and light) and shields (including tower
shields).
Bonus Feats: At 1st level, a fighter gets a bonus
combat-oriented feat in addition to the feat that
any 1st-level character gets and the bonus feat
granted to a human character. The fighter
gains an additional bonus feat at 2nd level
and every two fighter levels thereafter
(4th, 6th, 8th, 10th, 12th, 14th, 16th,
18th, and 20th). These bonus feats
must be drawn from the feats noted as fighter bonus
feats on Table 5–1: Feats (page 90). A fighter must still
meet all prerequisites for a bonus feat, including ability
score and base attack bonus minimums. (See Chapter 5:
Feats for descriptions of feats and their prerequisites.)
These bonus feats are in addition to the feat that a character of any
class gets from advancing levels (see Table 3–2: Experience and
Level-Dependent Benefits, page 22). A fighter is not limited to the
list of fighter bonus feats when choosing these feats.
Dwarf Fighter Starting Package
Armor: Scale mail (+4 AC, armor check penalty –4, speed 20 ft.,
30 lb.).
Heavy wooden shield (+2 AC, armor check penalty –2, 10 lb.)
Weapons: Dwarven waraxe (1d10, crit ×3, 8 lb., one-handed,
slashing).
Shortbow (1d6, crit ×3, range inc. 60 ft., 2 lb., piercing).
Skill Selection: Pick a number of skills equal to 2 + Int modifier.

MONK
Dotted across the landscape are monasteries—small, walled cloisters
inhabited by monks who pursue personal perfection through action
as well as contemplation. They train themselves to be versatile
warriors skilled at fighting without weapons or armor. The
inhabitants of monasteries headed by good masters serve as
protectors of the people. Ready for battle even when barefoot and
dressed in peasant clothes, monks can travel unnoticed among the
populace, catching bandits, warlords, and corrupt nobles unawares.
In contrast, the residents of monasteries headed by evil masters rule
the surrounding lands through fear, as an evil warlord and his
entourage might. Evil monks make ideal spies, infiltrators, and
assassins.
The individual monk is unlikely to care passionately about
championing commoners or amassing wealth. She cares primarily
for the perfection of her art and, thereby, her personal perfection.
Her goal is to achieve a state that is beyond the mortal realm.
Adventures: A monk approaches an adventure as if it were a
personal test. While not prone to showing off, monks are willing to
try their skills against whatever obstacles confront them. They are
not greedy for material wealth, but they eagerly seek that which can
help them perfect their art.
Characteristics: The key feature of the monk is her ability to
fight unarmed and unarmored. Thanks to her rigorous training, she
can strike as hard as if she were armed and strike faster than a
warrior with a sword.
Though a monk casts no spells, she has a magic of her own. She
channels a subtle energy, called ki, which allows her to perform
amazing feats. The monk’s best-known feat is her ability to stun an
opponent with an unarmed blow. A monk also has a preternatural
awareness that allows her to dodge an attack even if she is not consciously aware of it.
As the monk gains experience and power, her mundane and kioriented abilities grow, giving her more and more power over herself and, sometimes, over others.
Alignment: A monk’s training requires strict discipline. Only
those who are lawful at heart are capable of undertaking it.
Religion: A monk’s training is her spiritual path. She is innerdirected and capable of a private, mystic connection to the spiritual
world, so she needs neither clerics nor gods. Certain lawful gods,
however, may appeal to monks, who may meditate on the gods’
likenesses and attempt to emulate their deeds. The three most likely
candidates for a monk’s devotion are Heironeous (god of valor), St.
Cuthbert (god of retribution), and Hextor (god of tyranny).
Background: A monk typically trains in a monastery. Most
monks were children when they joined the monastery, sent to live
there when their parents died, when there wasn’t enough food to
support them, or in return for some kindness that the monastery
had performed for the family. Life in the monastery is so focused
that by the time a monk sets off on her own, she feels little connection to her former family or village.
In larger cities, master monks have set up monk schools to teach
their arts to those who are interested and worthy. The monks who
study at these academies often see their rural cousins from the
monasteries as backward.
A monk may feel a deep connection to her monastery or school,
to the monk who taught her, to the lineage into which she was
trained, or to all of these. Some monks, however, have no sense of
connection other than to their own path of personal development.
Monks recognize each other as a select group set apart from the
rest of the populace. They may feel kinship, but they also love to
compete with each other to see whose ki is strongest.
Races: Monasteries are found primarily among humans, who
have incorporated them into their ever-evolving culture. Thus,
many monks are humans, and many are half-orcs and half-elves who
live among humans. Elves are capable of single-minded, long-term
devotion to an interest, art, or discipline, and some of them leave the
forests to become monks. The monk tradition is alien to dwarf and
gnome culture, and halflings typically have too mobile a lifestyle to
commit themselves to a monastery, so dwarves, gnomes, and
halflings very rarely become monks.
The savage humanoids do not have the stable social structure that
allows monk training, but the occasional orphaned or abandoned
child from some humanoid tribe winds up in a civilized monastery
or is adopted by a wandering master. The evil subterranean elves
known as the drow have a small but successful monk tradition.
Other Classes: Monks sometimes seem distant because they
often have neither motivation nor skills in common with members
of other classes. Monks do, however, work well with the support of
others, and they usually prove themselves reliable companions.
Role: The monk functions best as an opportunistic combatant,
using her speed to get into and out of combat quickly rather than
engaging in prolonged melees. She also makes an excellent scout,
particularly if she focuses her skill selection on stealth.
GAME RULE INFORMATION
Monks have the following game statistics.
Abilities: Wisdom powers the monk’s special offensive and
defensive capabilities. Dexterity provides the unarmored monk with
a better defense and with bonuses to some class skills. Strength
helps a monk’s unarmed combat ability.
Alignment: Any lawful.
Hit Die: d8.
Class Skills
The monk’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are Balance
(Dex), Climb (Str), Concentration (Con), Craft (Int), Diplomacy
(Cha), Escape Artist (Dex), Hide (Dex), Jump (Str), Knowledge
(arcana) (Int), Knowledge (religion) (Int), Listen (Wis), Move
Silently (Dex), Perform (Cha), Profession (Wis), Sense Motive (Wis),
Spot (Wis), Swim (Str), and Tumble (Dex). See Chapter 4: Skills for
skill descriptions.
Skill Points at 1st Level: (4 + Int modifier) × 4.
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 4 + Int modifier.
Class Features
All of the following are class features of the monk.
Weapon and Armor Proficiency: Monks are proficient with
certain basic peasant weapons and some special weapons that are
part of monk training. The weapons with which a monk is proficient
are club, crossbow (light or heavy), dagger, handaxe, javelin, kama,
nunchaku, quarterstaff, sai, shuriken, siangham, and sling. (See
Chapter 7: Equipment for descriptions of these weapons.) Monks
are not proficient with any armor or shields—in fact, many of the
monk’s special powers require unfettered movement. When
wearing armor, using a shield, or carrying a medium or heavy load, a
monk loses her AC bonus, as well as her fast movement and flurry of
blows abilities.
AC Bonus (Ex): A monk is highly trained at dodging blows, and
she has a sixth sense that lets her avoid even unanticipated attacks.
When unarmored and unencumbered, the monk adds her Wisdom
bonus (if any) to her AC. In addition, a monk gains a +1 bonus to AC
at 5th level. This bonus increases by 1 for every five monk levels
thereafter (+2 at 10th, +3 at 15th, and +4 at 20th level).
These bonuses to AC apply even against touch attacks or when
the monk is flat-footed. She loses these bonuses when she is
immobilized or helpless, when she wears any armor, when she
carries a shield, or when she carries a medium or heavy load.
Flurry of Blows (Ex): When unarmored, a monk may strike with
a flurry of blows at the expense of accuracy. When doing so, she may
make one extra attack in a round at her highest base attack bonus,
but this attack takes a –2 penalty, as does each other attack made that
round. The resulting modified base attack bonuses are shown in the
Flurry of Blows Attack Bonus column on Table 3–10: The Monk.
This penalty applies for 1 round, so it also affects attacks of
opportunity the monk might make before her next action. When a
monk reaches 5th level, the penalty lessens to –1, and at 9th level it
disappears. A monk must use a full attack action (see page 143) to
strike with a flurry of blows.
When using flurry of blows, a monk may attack only with
unarmed strikes or with special monk weapons (kama, nunchaku,
quarterstaff, sai, shuriken, and siangham). She may attack with
unarmed strikes and special monk weapons interchangeably as
desired. For example, at 6th level, the monk Ember could make one
attack with her unarmed strike at an attack bonus of +3 and one
attack with a special monk weapon at an attack bonus of +3. When
using weapons as part of a flurry of blows, a monk applies her
Strength bonus (not Str bonus × 1-1/2 or × 1/2) to her damage rolls
for all successful attacks, whether she wields a weapon in one or
both hands. The monk can’t use any weapon other than a special
monk weapon as part of a flurry of blows.
In the case of the quarterstaff, each end counts as a separate
weapon for the purpose of using the flurry of blows ability. Even
though the quarterstaff requires two hands to use, a monk may still
intersperse unarmed strikes with quarterstaff strikes, assuming
that she has enough attacks in her flurry of blows
routine to do so. For example, an 8th-level monk
could make two attacks
with the quarterstaff (one
with each end) at a +5 attack
bonus and one with an
unarmed strike at a +0 attack
bonus, or she could attack with
one end of the quarterstaff and
one unarmed strike each at a +5
attack bonus, and with the other
end of the quarterstaff at a +0
attack bonus, or she could attack
with one end of the quarterstaff and
one unarmed strike at a +5 attack
bonus each, and with the other end of
the quarterstaff at a +0 attack bonus.
She cannot, however, wield any other
weapon at the same time that she uses
a quarterstaff.
When a monk reaches 11th level, her
flurry of blows ability improves. In
addition to the standard single extra
attack she gets from flurry of blows, she
gets a second extra attack at her full
base attack bonus.
Unarmed Strike: Monks are highly
trained in fighting unarmed, giving
them considerable advantages when
doing so. At 1st level, a monk gains
Improved Unarmed Strike as a bonus feat.
A monk’s attacks may be with either fist
interchangeably or even from elbows,
knees, and feet. This means that a monk
may even make unarmed strikes with her
hands full. There is no such thing as an off-hand
attack for a monk striking unarmed. A monk may
thus apply her full Strength bonus on damage rolls
for all her unarmed strikes.
Usually a monk’s unarmed strikes deal lethal damage, but she can
choose to deal nonlethal damage instead with no penalty on her
attack roll. She has the same choice to deal lethal or nonlethal
damage while grappling.
A monk’s unarmed strike is treated both as a manufactured
weapon and a natural weapon for the purpose of spells and effects
that enhance or improve either manufactured weapons or natural
weapons (such as the magic fang and magic weapon spells).
A monk also deals more damage with her unarmed strikes than a
normal person would, as shown on Table 3–10: The Monk. The
unarmed damage on Table 3–10 is for Medium monks. A Small
monk deals less damage than the amount given there with her
unarmed attacks, while a Large monk deals more damage; see Table:
Small or Large Monk Unarmed Damage.
Table 3–11: Small or Large Monk Unarmed Damage
Level Damage (Small Monk) Damage(Large Monk)
1st–3rd 1d4 1d8
4th–7th 1d6 2d6
8th–11th 1d8 2d8
12th–15th 1d10 3d6
16th–19th 2d6 3d8
20th 2d8 4d8
Bonus Feat: At 1st level, a monk may select either Improved
Grapple or Stunning Fist as a bonus feat. At 2nd level, she
may select either Combat Reflexes or Deflect Arrows as a
bonus feat. At 6th level, she may select either Improved
Disarm or Improved Trip as a bonus feat. (See Chapter
5: Feats for descriptions.) A monk need not have any
of the prerequisites normally required for these
feats to select them.
Evasion (Ex): A monk of 2nd level or higher
can avoid even magical and unusual attacks with
great agility. If she makes a successful Reflex
saving throw against an attack that normally
deals half damage on a successful save (such
as a red dragon’s fiery breath or a fireball), she
instead takes no damage. Evasion can be used
only if a monk is wearing light armor or no
armor. A helpless monk (such as one who is
unconscious or paralysed) does not gain the
benefit of evasion.
Fast Movement (Ex): At 3rd level, a
monk gains an enhancement bonus to
her speed, as shown on Table 3–10.
A monk in armor (even light
armor) or carrying a medium
or heavy load loses this
extra speed.
Still Mind (Ex): A monk of 3rd level or
higher gains a +2 bonus on saving throws
against spells and effects from the school of
enchantment, since her meditation and training
improve her resistance to mind-affecting
attacks.
Ki Strike (Su): At 4th level, a monk’s
unarmed attacks are empowered with ki. Her
unarmed attacks are treated as magic weapons
for the purpose of dealing damage to
creatures with damage reduction (see
Damage Reduction, page 291 of the
Dungeon Master’s Guide). Ki strike
improves with the character’s monk
level. At 10th level, her unarmed attacks are also treated as lawful
weapons for the purpose of dealing damage to creatures with
damage reduction. At 16th level, her unarmed attacks are treated as
adamantine weapons for the purpose of dealing damage to creatures
with damage reduction and bypassing hardness (see Smashing an
Object, page 165).
Slow Fall (Ex): At 4th level or higher, a monk within arm’s reach
of a wall can use it to slow her descent. When first using this ability,
she takes damage as if the fall were 20 feet shorter than it actually is.
The monk’s ability to slow her fall (that is, to reduce the effective
distance of the fall when next to a wall) improves with her monk
level until at 20th level she can use a nearby wall to slow her descent
and fall any distance without harm. See the Special column on Table
3–10 for details.
Purity of Body (Ex): At 5th level, a monk gains control over her
body’s immune system. She gains immunity to all diseases except
for supernatural and magical diseases (such as mummy rot and
lycanthropy).
Wholeness of Body (Su): At 7th level or higher, a monk can heal
her own wounds. She can heal a number of hit points of damage
equal to twice her current monk level each day, and she can spread
this healing out among several uses.
Improved Evasion (Ex): At 9th level, a monk’s evasion ability
improves. She still takes no damage on a successful Reflex saving
throw against attacks such as a dragon’s breath weapon or a fireball,
but henceforth she takes only half damage on a failed save. A helpless monk (such as one who is unconscious or paralysed) does not
gain the benefit of improved evasion.
Diamond Body (Su): At 11th level, a monk is in such firm control of her own metabolism that she gains immunity to poisons of all
kinds.
Abundant Step (Su): At 12th level or higher, a monk can slip
magically between spaces, as if using the spell dimension door, once
per day. Her caster level for this effect is one-half her monk level
(rounded down).
Diamond Soul (Ex): At 13th level, a monk gains spell resistance
equal to her current monk level + 10. In order to affect the monk
with a spell, a spellcaster must get a result on a caster level check
(1d20 + caster level; see Spell Resistance, page 177) that equals or
exceeds the monk’s spell resistance.
Quivering Palm (Su): Starting at 15th level, a monk can set up
vibrations within the body of another creature that can thereafter be
fatal if the monk so desires. She can use this quivering palm attack
once a week, and she must announce her intent before making her
attack roll. Constructs, oozes, plants, undead, incorporeal creatures,
and creatures immune to critical hits cannot be affected. Otherwise,
if the monk strikes successfully and the target takes damage from
the blow, the quivering palm attack succeeds. Thereafter the monk
can try to slay the victim at any later time, as long as the attempt is
made within a number of days equal to her monk level. To make
such an attempt, the monk merely wills the target to die (a free
action), and unless the target makes a Fortitude saving throw (DC 10
+ 1/2 the monk’s level + the monk’s Wis modifier), it dies. If the
saving throw is successful, the target is no longer in danger from
that particular quivering palm attack, but it may still be affected by
another one at a later time.
Timeless Body (Ex): Upon attaining 17th level, a monk no
longer takes penalties to her ability scores for aging and cannot be
magically aged. Any such penalties that she has already taken,
however, remain in place. Bonuses still accrue, and the monk still
dies of old age when her time is up.
Tongue of the Sun and Moon (Ex): A monk of 17th level or
higher can speak with any living creature.
Empty Body (Su): At 19th level, a monk gains the ability to
assume an ethereal state for 1 round per monk level per day, as
though using the spell etherealness. She may go ethereal on a number
of different occasions during any single day, as long as the total
number of rounds spent in an ethereal state does not exceed her
monk level.
Perfect Self: At 20th level, a monk has tuned her body with skill
and quasi-magical abilities to the point that she becomes a magical
creature. She is forevermore treated as an outsider (an extraplanar
creature) rather than as a humanoid for the purpose of spells and
magical effects. For instance, charm person does not affect her.
Additionally, the monk gains damage reduction 10/magic, which
allows her to ignore the first 10 points of damage from any attack
made by a nonmagical weapon or by any natural attack made by a
creature that doesn’t have similar damage reduction (see Damage
Reduction, page 291 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide). Unlike other
outsiders, the monk can still be brought back from the dead as if she
were a member of her previous creature type.
Ex-Monks
A monk who becomes nonlawful cannot gain new levels as a monk
but retains all monk abilities.
Like a member of any other class, a monk may be a multiclass
character, but multiclass monks face a special restriction. A monk
who gains a new class or (if already multiclass) raises another class
by a level may never again raise her monk level, though she retains
all her monk abilities.

PALADIN
The compassion to pursue good, the will to uphold law, and the
power to defeat evil—these are the three weapons of the paladin.
Few have the purity and devotion that it takes to walk the paladin’s
path, but those few are rewarded with the power to protect, to heal,
and to smite. In a land of scheming wizards, unholy priests,
bloodthirsty dragons, and infernal fiends, the paladin is the final
hope that cannot be extinguished.
Adventures: Paladins take their adventures seriously and have a
penchant for referring to them as quests. Even a mundane mission
is, in the heart of the paladin, a personal test—an opportunity to
demonstrate bravery, to develop martial skills, to learn tactics, and to
find ways to do good. Still, the paladin really comes into her own
when leading a mighty campaign against evil, not when merely
looting ruins.
Characteristics: Divine power protects the paladin and gives her
special powers. It wards off harm, protects her from disease, lets her
heal herself, and guards her heart against fear. The paladin can also
direct this power to help others, healing their wounds or curing
diseases. Finally, the paladin can use this power to destroy evil. Even
the least experienced paladin can detect evil, and more experienced
paladins can smite evil foes and turn away undead. In addition, this
power draws a mighty steed to the paladin and imbues that mount
with strength, intelligence, and magical protection.
Alignment: Paladins must be lawful good, and they lose their
divine powers if they deviate from that alignment. Additionally,
paladins swear to follow a code of conduct that is in line with lawfulness and goodness. 
Religion: Paladins need not devote themselves to a
single deity—devotion to righteousness is enough. Those
who align themselves with particular religions prefer
Heironeous (god of valor) over all others, but some paladins
follow Pelor (the sun god). Paladins devoted to a god are
scrupulous in observing religious duties and are welcome in
every associated temple.
Background: No one ever chooses to be a paladin.
Becoming a paladin is answering a call, accepting one’s
destiny. No one, no matter how diligent, can become a
paladin through practice. The nature is either within
one or not, and it is not possible to gain the paladin’s
nature by any act of will. It is possible, however, to fail
to recognize one’s own potential, or to deny one’s
destiny. Occasionally, one who is called to be a paladin
denies that call and pursues some other life instead.
Most paladins answer the call and begin training
as adolescents. Typically, they become squires or
assistants to experienced paladins, train for
years, and finally set off on their own to
further the causes of good and law. Other
paladins, however, find their calling only
later in life, after having pursued some
other career. All paladins, regardless
of background, recognize in each
other an eternal bond that
transcends culture, race, and even
religion. Any two paladins, even
from opposite sides of the world,
consider themselves comrades.
Races: Humans, with their
ambitious souls, make great
paladins. Half-elves, who often
have human ambition, may also
find themselves called into
service as paladins. Dwarves
are sometimes paladins, but
becoming a paladin may be
hard on a dwarf because it
means putting the duties of
the paladin’s life before
duties to family, clan, and king. Elf paladins are few, and they
tend to follow quests that take them far and wide because
their lawful bent puts them out of synch with life among the
elves. Members of the other common races rarely hear the
call to become paladins.
Among the savage humanoids, paladins are all but
unheard of.
Other Classes: Even though paladins are in some ways
set apart from others, they eagerly team up with those
whose skills and capabilities complement their own.
They work well with good and lawful clerics, and
they appreciate working with those who are
brave, honest, and committed to good. While
they cannot abide evil acts by their
companions, they are otherwise willing to
work with a variety of people quite different
from themselves. Charismatic, trustworthy, and
well respected, the paladin makes a fine leader
for a team.
Role: The paladin’s chief role in most
groups is as a melee combatant, but she
contributes other useful support as well. She
makes a good secondary healer, and her high
Charisma opens up fine leadership opportunities.
GAME RULE INFORMATION
Paladins have the following game statistics.
Abilities: Charisma enhances a paladin’s
healing, self-protective capabilities, and
undead turning ability. Strength is
important for a paladin because of its
role in combat. A Wisdom score of
14 or higher is required to get
access to the most powerful
paladin spells, and a score of 11 or
higher is required to cast any
paladin spells at all.
Alignment: Lawful good.
Hit Die: d10.
Class Skills
The paladin’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are
Concentration (Con), Craft (Int), Diplomacy (Cha), Handle Animal
(Cha), Heal (Wis), Knowledge (nobility and royalty) (Int),
Knowledge (religion) (Int), Profession (Wis), Ride (Dex), and Sense
Motive (Wis). See Chapter 4: Skills for skill descriptions.
Skill Points at 1st Level: (2 + Int modifier) × 4.
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 2 + Int modifier.
Class Features
All of the following are class features of the paladin.
Weapon and Armor Proficiency: Paladins are proficient with
all simple and martial weapons, with all types of armor (heavy,
medium, and light), and with shields (except tower shields).
Aura of Good (Ex): The power of a paladin’s aura of good (see the
detect good spell) is equal to her paladin level, just like the aura of a
cleric of a good deity.
Detect Evil (Sp): At will, a paladin can use detect evil, as the spell.
Smite Evil (Su): Once per day, a paladin may attempt to smite
evil with one normal melee attack. She adds her Charisma bonus (if
any) to her attack roll and deals 1 extra point of damage per paladin
level. For example, a 13th-level paladin armed with a longsword
would deal 1d8+13 points of damage, plus any additional bonuses for
high Strength or magical affects that would normally apply. If the
paladin accidentally smites a creature that is not evil, the smite has
no effect, but the ability is still used up for that day.
At 5th level, and at every five levels thereafter, the paladin may
smite evil one additional time per day, as indicated on Table 3–12:
The Paladin, to a maximum of five times per day at 20th level.
Divine Grace (Su): At 2nd level, a paladin gains a bonus equal to
her Charisma bonus (if any) on all saving throws.
Lay on Hands (Su): Beginning at 2nd level, a paladin with a
Charisma score of 12 or higher can heal wounds (her own or those
of others) by touch. Each day she can heal a total number of hit
points of damage equal to her paladin level × her Charisma bonus.
For example, a 7th-level paladin with a 16 Charisma (+3 bonus) can
heal 21 points of damage per day. A paladin may choose to divide
her healing among multiple recipients, and she doesn’t have to use it
all at once. Using lay on hands is a standard action.
Alternatively, a paladin can use any or all of this healing power to
deal damage to undead creatures. Using lay on hands in this way
requires a successful melee touch attack and doesn’t provoke an
attack of opportunity. The paladin decides how many of her daily
allotment of points to use as damage after successfully touching an
undead creature.
Aura of Courage (Su): Beginning at 3rd level, a paladin is
immune to fear (magical or otherwise). Each ally within 10 feet of
her gains a +4 morale bonus on saving throws against fear effects.
This ability functions while the paladin is conscious, but not if
she is unconscious or dead.
Divine Health (Ex): At 3rd level, a paladin gains immunity to all
diseases, including supernatural and magical diseases (such as
mummy rot and lycanthropy).
Turn Undead (Su): When a paladin reaches 4th level, she gains
the supernatural ability to turn undead. She may use this ability a
number of times per day equal to 3 + her Charisma modifier. She
turns undead as a cleric of three levels lower would. (See Turn or
Rebuke Undead, page 159.)
Spells: Beginning at 4th level, a paladin gains the ability to cast a
small number of divine spells (the same type of spells available to
the cleric, druid, and ranger), which are drawn from the paladin
spell list (page 191). A paladin must choose and prepare her spells in
advance.
To prepare or cast a spell, a paladin must have a Wisdom score
equal to at least 10 + the spell level (Wis 11 for 1st-level spells, Wis
12 for 2nd-level spells, and so forth). The Difficulty Class for a saving
throw against a paladin’s spell is 10 + the spell level + the paladin’s
Wisdom modifier.
Like other spellcasters, a paladin can cast only a certain number of
spells of each spell level per day. Her base daily spell allotment is
given on Table 3–12: The Paladin. In addition, she receives bonus
spells per day if she has a high Wisdom score (see Table 1–1: Ability
Modifiers and Bonus Spells, page 8). When Table 3–12 indicates that
the paladin gets 0 spells per day of a given spell level (for instance,
1st-level spells for a 4th-level paladin), she gains only the bonus
spells she would be entitled to based on her Wisdom score for that
spell level The paladin does not have access to any domain spells or
granted powers, as a cleric does.
A paladin prepares and casts spells the way a cleric does, though
she cannot lose a prepared spell to spontaneously cast a cure spell in
its place. A paladin may prepare and cast any spell on the paladin
spell list (page 191), provided that she can cast spells of that level,
but she must choose which spells to prepare during her daily
meditation.
Through 3rd level, a paladin has no caster level. At 4th level and
higher, her caster level is one-half her paladin level.
Special Mount (Sp): Upon reaching 5th level, a paladin gains the
service of an unusually intelligent, strong, and loyal steed to serve
her in her crusade against evil (see the sidebar). This mount is usually a heavy warhorse (for a Medium paladin) or a warpony (for a
Small paladin).
Once per day, as a full-round action, a paladin may magically call
her mount from the celestial realms in which it resides. The mount
immediately appears adjacent to the paladin and remains for 2 hours
per paladin level; it may be dismissed at any time as a free action.
The mount is the same creature each time it is summoned, though
the paladin may release a particular mount from service (if it has
grown too old to join her crusade, for instance). Each time the
mount is called, it appears in full health, regardless of any damage it
may have taken previously. The mount also appears wearing or
carrying any gear it had when it was last dismissed )including
barding, saddle, saddlebags, and the like). Calling a mount is a
conjuration (calling) effect.
Should the paladin’s mount die, it immediately disappears, leaving behind any equipment it was carrying. The paladin may not
summon another mount for thirty days or until she gains a paladin
level, whichever comes first, even if the mount is somehow returned
from the dead. During this thirty-day period, the paladin takes a –1
penalty on attack and weapon damage rolls.
Remove Disease (Sp): At 6th level, a paladin can produce a remove
disease effect, as the spell, once per week. She can use this ability one
additional time per week for every three levels after 6th (twice per
week at 9th, three times at 12th, and so forth).
Code of Conduct: A paladin must be of lawful good alignment
and loses all class abilities if she ever willingly commits an evil act.
Additionally, a paladin’s code requires that she respect legitimate
authority, act with honor (not lying, not cheating, not using poison,
and so forth), help those in need (provided they do not use the help
for evil or chaotic ends), and punish those who harm or threaten
innocents.
Associates: While she may adventure with characters of any
good or neutral alignment, a paladin will never knowingly associate
with evil characters, nor will she continue an association with
someone who consistently offends her moral code. A paladin may
accept only henchmen, followers, or cohorts who are lawful good.
Ex-Paladins
A paladin who ceases to be lawful good, who willfully commits an
evil act, or who grossly violates the code of conduct loses all paladin
spells and abilities (including the service of the paladin’s mount, but
not weapon, armor, and shield proficiencies). She may not progress
any farther in levels as a paladin. She regains her abilities and
advancement potential if she atones for her violations (see the
atonement spell description, page 201), as appropriate.
Like a member of any other class, a paladin may be a multiclass
character, but multiclass paladins face a special restriction. A paladin
who gains a level in any class other than paladin may never again
raise her paladin level, though she retains all her paladin abilities.
The path of the paladin requires a constant heart. If a character
adopts this class, she must pursue it to the exclusion of all other
careers. Once she has turned off the path, she may never return.

THE PALADIN’S MOUNT
The paladin’s mount is superior to a normal mount of its kind and has
special powers, as described below. The standard mount for a Medium
paladin is a heavy warhorse, and the standard mount for a Small paladin
is a warpony (see below for statistics). Your DM may work with you to
select another kind of mount, such as a riding dog (for a halfling paladin)
or a Large shark (for a paladin in an aquatic campaign). A paladin’s
mount is treated as a magical beast, not an animal, for the purpose of all
effects that depend on its type (though it retains an animal’s HD, base
attack bonus, saves, skill points, and feats).
Paladin Bonus Natural Str
Level HD Armor Adj. Adj. Int Special
5th–7th +2 +4 +1 6 Empathic link, improved
 evasion, share spells,
 share saving throws
8th–10th +4 +6 +2 7 Improved speed
11th–14th +6 +8 +3 8 Command creatures of
 its kind
15th–20th +8 +10 +4 9 Spell resistance
Paladin’s Mount Basics: Use the base statistics for a creature of the
mount’s kind, as given in the Monster Manual, but make changes to take
into account the attributes and characteristics summarized on the table
and described below.
Bonus HD: Extra eight-sided (d8) Hit Dice, each of which gains a
Constitution modifier, as normal. Extra Hit Dice improve the mount’s
base attack and base save bonuses. A special mount’s base attack bonus
is equal to that of a cleric of a level equal to the mount’s HD. A mount
has good Fortitude and Reflex saves (treat it as a character whose level
equals the animal’s HD). The mount gains additional skill points or feats
for bonus HD as normal for advancing a monster’s Hit Dice (see the
Monster Manual).
Natural Armor Adj.: The number on the table is an improvement to the
mount’s existing natural armor bonus. It represents the preternatural
toughness of a paladin’s mount.
Str Adj.: Add this figure to the mount’s Strength score.
Int: The mount’s Intelligence score.
Empathic Link (Su): The paladin has an empathic link with her mount
out to a distance of up to 1 mile. The paladin cannot see through the
mount’s eyes, but they can communicate empathically. Note that even
intelligent mounts see the world differently from humans, so
misunderstandings are always possible.
Because of this empathic link, the paladin has the same connection to
an item or place that her mount does, just as with a master and his
familiar (see Familiars, page 52).
Improved Evasion (Ex): When subjected to an attack that normally
allows a Reflex saving throw for half damage, a mount takes no damage
if it makes a successful saving throw and half damage if the saving throw
fails.
Share Spells: At the paladin’s option, she may have any spell (but not
any spell-like ability) she casts on herself also affect her mount. The
mount must be within 5 feet at the time of casting to receive the benefit.
If the spell or effect has a duration other than instantaneous, it stops
affecting the mount if it moves farther than 5 feet away and will not affect
the mount again even if it returns to the paladin before the duration
expires. Additionally, the paladin may cast a spell with a target of “You”
on her mount (as a touch range spell) instead of on herself. A paladin
and her mount can share spells even if the spells normally do not affect
creatures of the mount’s type (magical beast).
Share Saving Throws: For each of its saving throws, the mount uses its
own base save bonus or the paladin’s, whichever is higher. The mount
applies its own ability modifiers to saves, and it doesn’t share any other
bonuses on saves that the master might have (such as from magic items
or feats).
Improved Speed (Ex): The mount’s speed increases by 10 feet.
Command (Sp): Once per day per two paladin levels of its master, a
mount can use this ability to command other any normal animal of
approximately the same kind as itself (for warhorses and warponies, this
category includes donkeys, mules, and ponies), as long as the target
creature has fewer Hit Dice than the mount. This ability functions like the
command spell, but the mount must make a DC 21 Concentration check
to succeed if it’s being ridden at the time (in combat, for instance). If the
check fails, the ability does not work that time, but it still counts against
the mount’s daily uses. Each target may attempt a Will save (DC 10 + 1/2
paladin’s level + paladin’s Cha modifier) to negate the effect.
Spell Resistance (Ex): A mount’s spell resistance equals its master’s
paladin level + 5. To affect the mount with a spell, a spellcaster must get
a result on a caster level check (1d20 + caster level; see Spell Resistance,
page 177) that equals or exceeds the mount’s spell resistance.
SAMPLE PALADIN’S MOUNTS
The statistics below are for normal creatures of the appropriate kinds;
they do not include the modifications given on the table above.
Heavy Warhorse: CR 2; Large animal; HD 4d8+12; hp 30; Init +1; Spd
50 ft.; AC 14, touch 10, flat-footed 13; Base Atk +3; Grp +11; Atk +6 melee
(1d6+4, hoof); Full Atk +6/+6 melee (1d6+4, 2 hooves) and +1 melee
(1d4+2, bite); Space/Reach 10 ft./5 ft.; SQ low-light vision, scent; SV Fort
+7, Ref +5, Will +2; Str 18, Dex 13, Con 17, Int 2, Wis 13, Cha 6.
Skills and Feats: Jump +12, Listen +5, Spot +4; Endurance, Run.
Warpony: CR 1/3; Medium animal; HD 2d8+4; hp 13; Init +1; Spd 40
ft.; AC 13, touch 11, flat-footed 12; Base Atk +1; Grp +3; Atk +3 melee
(1d3+2, hoof); Full Atk +3/+3 melee (1d3+2, 2 hooves); Space/Reach 5
ft./5 ft.; SQ low-light vision, scent; SV Fort +5, Ref +4, Will +0; Str 15, Dex
13, Con 14, Int 2, Wis 11, Cha 4.
Skills and Feats: Jump +6, Listen +5, Spot +5; Endurance.
See page 85 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide for more information on
how to read a creature’s statistics block.

RANGER
The forests are home to fierce and cunning
creatures, such as bloodthirsty
owlbears and malicious displacer
beasts. But more cunning and
powerful than these monsters is the
ranger, a skilled hunter and stalker. He
knows the woods as if they were his
home (as indeed they are), and he
knows his prey in deadly detail.
Adventures: A ranger often accepts
the role of protector, aiding those who
live in or travel through the woods. In
addition, a ranger carries grudges
against certain types of creatures and
looks for opportunities to find and
destroy them. He may adventure for all
the reasons that a fighter does.
Characteristics: A ranger can use a variety
of weapons and is quite capable in combat.
His skills allow him to survive in the
wilderness, to find his prey, and to avoid
detection. He also has special
knowledge about certain types of
creatures, which makes it easier for him to find and defeat such foes.
Finally, an experienced ranger has such a tie to nature that he can
actually draw upon natural power to cast divine spells, much as a
druid does.
Alignment: Rangers can be of any alignment. Most are good, and
such rangers usually function as protectors of the wild areas. In this
role, a ranger seeks out and destroys or
drives off evil creatures that threaten
the wilderness. Good rangers also protect
those who travel through the wilderness,
serving sometimes as guides and sometimes
as unseen guardians. Most rangers are also
chaotic, preferring to follow the ebb and flow
of nature or of their own hearts instead of rigid
rules. Evil rangers, though rare, are much to be
feared. They revel in nature’s thoughtless
cruelty and seek to emulate her most fearsome
predators. They gain divine spells just as good
rangers do, for nature herself is indifferent to
good and evil.
Religion: Though a ranger gains his
divine spells from the power of nature, he
like anyone else may worship a chosen
deity. Ehlonna (goddess of the woodlands) and Obad-Hai (god of nature) are
the most common deities revered by,
though some prefer more martial deities.
Background: Some rangers gained
their training as part of special military
teams, but most learned their skills from
solitary masters who accepted them as
students and assistants. The rangers of a
particular master may count themselves as
cohorts, or they may be rivals for the status
of best student and thus the rightful heir
to their master’s fame.
Races: Elves often choose the ranger’s
path. They are at home in the woods, and
they have the grace to move stealthily.
Half-elves who feel their elf parents’
connection to the woods are also
likely to adopt this class. Humans are
often rangers as well, being adaptable enough to learn their way
around the woods even if it doesn’t come naturally to them. Halforcs may find the life of a ranger more comfortable than life among
cruel and taunting humans (or orcs). Gnome rangers are more
common than gnome fighters, but still they tend to remain in their
own lands rather than adventure among “the big people.” Dwarf
rangers are rare, but they can be quite effective. Instead of living in
the surface wilderness, they are at home in the endless caverns
beneath the earth. Here they hunt down and destroy the enemies of
dwarvenkind with the relentless precision for which dwarves are
known. Dwarf rangers are often known as cavers. Halfling rangers
are highly respected for their ability to help communities of
halflings prosper as they pursue their nomadic lifestyle.
Among the savage humanoids, only gnolls are commonly rangers,
using their skills to slyly stalk their prey.
Classes: Rangers get along well with druids and to some extent
with barbarians. They are known to bicker with paladins, mostly
because they often share goals but differ in style, tactics, approach,
philosophy, and esthetics. Since rangers don’t often look to other
people for support or friendship, they find it easy to tolerate people
who are quite different from themselves, such as bookish wizards
and preachy clerics. They just don’t care enough to get upset about
others’ differences.
Role: The ranger’s best role is that of a scout and secondary
combatant. Without the heavy armor of the fighter or the staying
power of the barbarian, the ranger should focus on opportunistic
and ranged attacks. Most rangers user their animal companions as
sentries, scouts, or to assist them in melee combat.
GAME RULE INFORMATION
Rangers have the following game statistics.
Abilities: Dexterity is important for a ranger both because he
tends to wear light armor and because several ranger skills are based
on that ability. Strength is important because rangers frequently get
involved in combat. Several ranger skills are based on Wisdom, and
a Wisdom score of 14 or higher is required to get access to the most
powerful ranger spells. A Wisdom score of 11 or higher is required
to cast any ranger spells at all. One of the ranger’s trademark skills,
his ability to track foes, is based on Wisdom.
Alignment: Any.
Hit Die: d8.
Class Skills
The ranger’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are Climb
(Str), Concentration (Con), Craft (Int), Handle Animal (Cha), Heal
(Wis), Hide (Dex), Jump (Str), Knowledge (dungeoneering) (Int),
Knowledge (geography) (Int), Knowledge (nature) (Int), Listen
(Wis), Move Silently (Dex), Profession (Wis), Ride (Dex), Search
(Int), Spot (Wis), Survival (Wis), Swim (Str), and Use Rope (Dex).
See Chapter 4: Skills for skill descriptions.
Skill Points at 1st Level: (6 + Int modifier) × 4.
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 6 + Int modifier.
Class Features
All of the following are class features of the ranger.
Weapon and Armor Proficiency: A ranger is proficient with all
simple and martial weapons, and with light armor and shields
(except tower shields).
Favored Enemy (Ex): At 1st level, a ranger may select a type of
creature from among those given on Table 3–14: Ranger Favored
Enemies. Due to his extensive study on his chosen type of foe and
training in the proper techniques for combating such creatures, the
ranger gains a +2 bonus on Bluff, Listen, Sense Motive, Spot, and
Survival checks when using these skills against creatures of this
type. Likewise, he gets a +2 bonus on weapon damage rolls against
such creatures.
At 5th level and every five levels thereafter (10th, 15th, and 20th
level), the ranger may select an additional favored enemy from those
given on the table. In addition, at each such interval, the bonus
against any one favored enemy (including the one just selected, if so
desired) increases by 2. For example, a 5th-level ranger has two
favored enemies; against one he gains a +4 bonus on Bluff, Listen,
Sense Motive, Spot, and Survival checks and weapon damage rolls,
and against the other he has a +2 bonus. At 10th level, he has three
favored enemies, and he gains an additional +2 bonus, which he can
allocate to the bonus against any one of his three favored enemies.
Thus, his bonuses could be either +4, +4, +2 or +6, +2, +2.
If the ranger chooses humanoids or outsiders as a favored enemy,
he must also choose an associated subtype, as indicated on the table.
If a specific creature falls into more than one category of favored
enemy (for instance, devils are both evil outsiders and lawful
outsiders), the ranger’s bonuses do not stack; he simply uses
whichever bonus is higher. See the Monster Manual for more information on types of creatures.
Table 3–14: Ranger Favored Enemies
Type (Subtype) Examples
Aberration beholder
Animal bear
Construct golem
Dragon black dragon
Elemental invisible stalker
Fey dryad
Giant ogre
Humanoid (aquatic) merfolk
Humanoid (dwarf) dwarf
Humanoid (elf) elf
Humanoid (goblinoid) hobgoblin
Humanoid (gnoll) gnoll
Humanoid (gnome) gnome
Humanoid (halfling) halfling
Humanoid (human) human
Humanoid (orc) orc
Humanoid (reptilian) kobold
Magical beast displacer beast
Monstrous humanoid minotaur
Ooze gelatinous cube
Outsider (air) arrowhawk
Outsider (chaotic) demon
Outsider (earth) xorn
Outsider (evil) devil
Outsider (fire) salamander
Outsider (good) angel
Outsider (lawful) formian
Outsider (native) tiefling
Outsider (water) tojanida
Plant shambling mound
Undead zombie
Vermin monstrous spider
Track: A ranger gains Track (see page 101) as a bonus feat.
Wild Empathy (Ex): A ranger can use body language, vocalizations, and demeanor to improve the attitude of an animal (such as a
bear or a monitor lizard). This ability functions just like a Diplomacy
check to improve the attitude of a person (see page 72). The ranger
rolls 1d20 and adds his ranger level and his Charisma bonus to
determine the wild empathy check result. The typical domestic
animal has a starting attitude of indifferent, while wild animals are
usually unfriendly.
To use wild empathy, the ranger and the animal must be able to
study each other, which means that they must be within 30 feet of
one another under normal visibility conditions. Generally,
influencing an animal in this way takes 1 minute, but, as with
influencing people, it might take more or less time.
The ranger can also use this ability to influence a magical beast
with an Intelligence score of 1 or 2 (such as a basilisk or a girallon),
but he takes a –4 penalty on the check.
Combat Style (Ex): At 2nd level, a ranger must select one of two
combat styles to pursue: archery or two-weapon combat. This choice
affects the character’s class features but does not restrict his
selection of feats or special abilities in any way.
If the ranger selects archery, he is treated as having the Rapid
Shot feat, even if he does not have the normal prerequisites for that
feat.
If the ranger selects two-weapon combat, he is treated as having
the Two-Weapon Fighting feat, even if he does not have the normal
prerequisites for that feat.
The benefits of the ranger’s chosen style apply only when he
wears light or no armor. He loses all benefits of his combat style
when wearing medium or heavy armor.
Endurance: A ranger gains Endurance (see page 93) as a bonus
feat at 3rd level.
Animal Companion (Ex): At 4th level, a ranger gains an animal
companion selected from the following list: badger, camel, dire rat,
dog, riding dog, eagle, hawk, horse (light or heavy), owl, pony, snake
(Small or Medium viper), or wolf. If the DM’s campaign takes place
wholly or partly in an aquatic environment, the DM may add the
following creatures to the ranger’s list of options: crocodile,
porpoise, Medium shark, and squid. This animal is a loyal
companion that accompanies the ranger on his adventures as
appropriate for its kind. (For instance, an aquatic creature can’t
adventure with a ranger on land and shouldn’t be selected by a
nonaquatic character without extenuating circumstances). In most
cases, the animal companion functions as a mount, sentry, scout, or
hunting animal, rather than as a protector.
This ability functions like the druid ability of the same name (see
page 35), except that the ranger’s effective druid level is one-half his
ranger level. For example, the animal companion of a 4th-level
ranger would be the equivalent of a 2nd-level druid’s animal
companion. A ranger may select from the alternative lists of animal
companions just as a druid can, though again his effective druid
level is half his ranger level. Thus, he must be at least an 8th-level
ranger to select from the druid’s list of 4th-level animal companions,
and if he chooses one of those animals, his effective druid level
would be reduced by 3, to 1st level. Like a druid, a ranger cannot
select an alternative animal if the choice would reduce his effective
druid level below 1st.
Spells: Beginning at 4th level, a ranger gains the ability to cast a
small number of divine spells (the same type of spells available to
the cleric, druid, and paladin), which are drawn from the ranger
spell list (page 191). A ranger must choose and prepare his spells in
advance (see below).
To prepare or cast a spell, a ranger must have a Wisdom score
equal to at least 10 + the spell level (Wis 11 for 1st-level spells, Wis
12 for 2nd-level spells, and so forth). The Difficulty Class for a saving
throw against a ranger’s spell is 10 + the spell level + the ranger’s
Wisdom modifier.
Like other spellcasters, a ranger can cast only a certain number of
spells of each spell level per day. His base daily spell allotment is
given on Table 3–13: The Ranger. In addition, he receives bonus
spells per day if he has a high Wisdom score (see Table 1–1: Ability
Modifiers and Bonus Spells, page 8). When Table 3–13 indicates that
the ranger gets 0 spells per day of a given spell level (for instance,
1st-level spells for a 4th-level ranger), he gains only the bonus spells
he would be entitled to based on his Wisdom score for that spell
level. The ranger does not have access to any domain spells or
granted powers, as a cleric does.
A ranger prepares and casts spells the way a cleric does, though he
cannot lose a prepared spell to cast a cure spell in its place. A ranger
may prepare and cast any spell on the ranger spell list, provided that
he can cast spells of that level, but he must choose which spells to
prepare during his daily meditation.
Through 3rd level, a ranger has no caster level. At 4th level and
higher, his caster level is one-half his ranger level.
Improved Combat Style (Ex): At 6th level, a ranger’s aptitude in
his chosen combat style (archery or two-weapon combat) improves.
If he selected archery at 2nd level, he is treated as having the
Manyshot feat (page 97), even if he does not have the normal
prerequisites for that feat.
If the ranger selected two-weapon combat at 2nd level, he is
treated as having the Improved Two-Weapon Fighting feat (page
96), even if he does not have the normal prerequisites for that feat.
As before, the benefits of the ranger’s chosen style apply only
when he wears light or no armor. He loses all benefits of his combat
style when wearing medium or heavy armor.
Woodland Stride (Ex): Starting at 7th level, a ranger may move
through any sort of undergrowth (such as natural thorns, briars,
overgrown areas, and similar terrain) at his normal speed and
without taking damage or suffering any other impairment.
However, thorns, briars, and overgrown areas that are enchanted or
magically manipulated to impede motion still affect him.
Swift Tracker (Ex): Beginning at 8th level, a ranger can move at
his normal speed while following tracks without taking the normal
–5 penalty. He takes only a –10 penalty (instead of the normal –20)
when moving at up to twice normal speed while tracking.
Evasion (Ex): At 9th level, a ranger can avoid even magical and
unusual attacks with great agility. If he makes a successful Reflex
saving throw against an attack that normally deals half damage on a
successful save (such as a red dragon’s fiery breath or a fireball), he
instead takes no damage. Evasion can be used only if the ranger is
wearing light armor or no armor. A helpless ranger (such as one who
is unconscious or paralysed) does not gain the benefit of evasion.
Combat Style Mastery (Ex): At 11th level, a ranger’s aptitude in
his chosen combat style (archery or two-weapon combat) improves
again. If he selected archery at 2nd level, he is treated as having the
Improved Precise Shot feat (page 96), even if he does not have the
normal prerequisites for that feat.
If the ranger selected two-weapon combat at 2nd level, he is
treated as having the Greater Two-Weapon Fighting feat (page 95),
even if he does not have the normal prerequisites for that feat.
As before, the benefits of the ranger’s chosen style apply only
when he wears light or no armor. He loses all benefits of his combat
style when wearing medium or heavy armor.
Camouflage (Ex): A ranger of 13th level or higher can use the
Hide skill in any sort of natural terrain, even if the terrain doesn’t
grant cover or concealment.
Hide in Plain Sight (Ex): While in any sort of natural terrain, a
ranger of 17th level or higher can use the Hide skill even while
being observed. 

ROGUE
Rogues share little in common with each other. Some are stealthy
thieves. Others are silver-tongued tricksters. Still others are scouts,
infiltrators, spies, diplomats, or thugs. What they share is versatility,
adaptability, and resourcefulness. In general, rogues are skilled at
getting what others don’t want them to get: entrance into a locked
treasure vault, safe passage past a deadly trap, secret battle plans, a
guard’s trust, or some random person’s pocket money.
Adventures: Rogues adventure for the same reason they do most
things: to get what they can get. Some are after loot; others want
experience. Some crave fame; others seek infamy. Quite a few also
enjoy a challenge. Figuring out how to thwart a trap or avoid an
alarm is great fun for many rogues.
Characteristics: Rogues are highly skilled, and they can concentrate on developing any of several categories of skills. While not
equal to members of many other classes in combat, a rogue knows
how to hit where it hurts, and she can dish out a lot of damage with a
sneak attack.
Rogues have a sixth sense when it comes to avoiding danger.
Experienced rogues develop mystical powers and skills as they
master the arts of stealth, evasion, and sneak attacks. In addition,
while not capable of casting spells on their own, rogues can “fake it”
well enough to cast spells from scrolls, activate wands, and use just
about any other magic item.
Alignment: Rogues follow opportunity, not ideals. They are
more likely to be chaotic than lawful, they are a diverse bunch, so
they may be of any alignment.
Religion: Although they are not renowned for their piety, most
rogues revere Olidammara (god of thieves). Evil rogues might
secretly worship Nerull (god of death), or Erythnul (god of slaughter). Since rogues are so diverse, however, many of them worship
other deities, or none at all.
Background: Some rogues are officially inducted into an
organized fellowship of rogues or “guild of thieves.” Some are selftaught; others learned their skills from independent mentors. Often,
an experienced rogue needs an assistant for scams, second-story jobs,
or just for watching her back. She recruits a likely youngster, who
then learns the skills of the trade on the job. Eventually, the trainee
is ready to move on, perhaps because the mentor has run afoul of the
law, or perhaps because the trainee has double-crossed her mentor
and needs some “space.”
Rogues do not see each other as fellows unless they happen to be
members of the same guild or students of the same mentor. In fact,
rogues trust other rogues less than they trust anyone else. They’re no
fools.
Races: Adaptable and often unprincipled, humans take to the
rogue’s life with ease. Halflings, elves, and half-elves also find
themselves well suited to the demands of the career. Dwarf and
gnome rogues, while less common, are renowned as experts with
locks and traps. Half-orc rogues tend toward thuggery.
Rogues are common among brutal humanoids, especially goblins
and bugbears. Rogues who learn their arts in savage lands, however,
generally don’t have much experience with complex mechanisms
such as traps and locks.
Other Classes: Rogues love and hate working with members of
other classes. They excel when protected by warriors and supported
by spellcasters. There are plenty of times, however, that they wish
everyone else was as quiet, guileful, and patient as they. Rogues are
particularly wary of paladins, so they endeavor to prove themselves
useful when contact with paladins is unavoidable.
Role: The rogue’s role in a group can vary dramatically based on
her skill selection—from charismatic con artist to cunning burglar
to agile combatant—but most rogues share certain aspects. They
aren’t capable of prolonged melee combat, so they focus on
opportunistic sneak attacks or ranged attacks. The rogue’s stealth
and her trapfinding ability make her one of the best scouts in the
game. 

GAME RULE INFORMATION
Rogues have the following game statistics.
Abilities: Dexterity provides extra protection for the lightly
armored rogue. Dexterity, Intelligence and Wisdom are important
for many of the rogue’s skills. A high Intelligence score also gives
the rogue extra skill points, which can be used to expand her
repertoire.
Alignment: Any.
Hit Die: d6.
Class Skills
The rogue’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are
Appraise (Int), Balance (Dex), Bluff (Cha), Climb (Str), Craft
(Int), Decipher Script (Int), Diplomacy (Cha), Disable
Device (Int), Disguise (Cha), Escape Artist (Dex), Forgery
(Int), Gather Information (Cha), Hide (Dex), Intimidate
(Cha), Jump (Str), Knowledge (local) (Int), Listen (Wis),
Move Silently (Dex), Open Lock (Dex), Perform (Cha),
Profession (Wis), Search (Int), Sense Motive (Wis),
Sleight of Hand (Dex), Spot (Wis), Swim (Str),
Tumble (Dex), Use Magic Device (Cha), and
Use Rope (Dex). See Chapter 4: Skills for skill
descriptions.
Skill Points at 1st Level: (8 +
Int modifier) × 4.
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 8 + Int modifier.
Class Features
All of the following are class features of the
rogue.
Weapon and Armor Proficiency: Rogues
are proficient with all simple
weapons, plus the hand
crossbow, rapier, shortbow,
and short sword. Rogues are
proficient with light armor,
but not with shields.
Sneak Attack: If a rogue can
catch an opponent when he is
unable to defend himself
effectively from her attack,
she can strike a vital spot for extra damage. Basically,
the rogue’s attack deals extra damage any time her target
would be denied a Dexterity bonus to AC (whether the target
actually has a Dexterity bonus or not), or when the rogue flanks her
target. This extra damage is 1d6 at 1st level, and it increases by 1d6
every two rogue levels thereafter. Should the rogue score a critical
hit with a sneak attack, this extra damage is not multiplied. (See
Table 8–5: Attack Roll Modifiers and Table 8–6: Armor Class
Modifiers, page 151, for combat situations in which the rogue flanks
an opponent or the opponent loses his Dexterity bonus to AC.)
Ranged attacks can count as sneak attacks only if the target is
within 30 feet. A rogue can’t strike with deadly accuracy from
beyond that range.
With a sap (blackjack) or an unarmed strike, a rogue can make a
sneak attack that deals nonlethal damage instead of lethal damage.
She cannot use a weapon that deals lethal damage to deal nonlethal
damage in a sneak attack, not even with the usual –4 penalty,
because she must make optimal use of her weapon in order to
execute a sneak attack. (See Nonlethal Damage, page 146.)
A rogue can sneak attack only living creatures with discernible
anatomies—undead, constructs, oozes, plants, and incorporeal
creatures lack vital areas to attack. Any creature that is immune to
critical hits is not vulnerable to sneak attacks. The rogue must be
able to see the target well enough to pick out a vital spot and must be
able to reach such a spot. A rogue cannot sneak attack while striking
a creature with concealment (see page 152) or striking the limbs of a
creature whose vitals are beyond reach.
Trapfinding: Rogues (and only rogues) can use the Search skill
to locate traps when the task has a Difficulty Class higher than 20.
Finding a nonmagical trap has a DC of at least 20, or higher if it is
well hidden. Finding a magic trap has a DC of 25 + the level of the
spell used to create it.
Rogues (and only rogues) can use the Disable Device skill to
disarm magic traps. A magic trap generally has a DC of 25 + the level
of the spell used to create it.
A rogue who beats a trap’s DC by 10 or more
with a Disable Device check can study a
trap, figure out how it works, and bypass it
(with her party) without disarming it.
Evasion (Ex): At 2nd level and higher, a
rogue can avoid even magical and unusual
attacks with great agility. If she makes a
successful Reflex saving throw against an
attack that normally deals half damage on
a successful save (such as a red dragon’s
fiery breath or a fireball), she
instead takes no damage. Evasion
can be used only if the rogue is
wearing light armor or no
armor. A helpless rogue (such as
one who is unconscious or
paralysed) does not gain the
benefit of evasion.
Trap Sense (Ex): At 3rd level, a rogue
gains an intuitive sense that alerts her to
danger from traps, giving her a +1
bonus on Reflex saves made to
avoid traps and a +1 dodge bonus to
AC against attacks made by traps.
These bonuses rise to +2 when the
rogue reaches 6th level, to +3 when
she reaches 9th level, to +4 when
she reaches 12th level, to +5 at
15th, and to +6 at 18th level.
Trap sense bonuses gained from
multiple classes stack.
Uncanny Dodge (Ex): Starting at 4th level, a
rogue can react to danger before her senses would
normally allow her to do so. She retains her Dexterity
bonus to AC (if any) even if she is caught flat-footed or struck by an
invisible attacker. However, she still loses her Dexterity bonus to
AC if immobilized.
If a rogue already has uncanny dodge from a different class (a
rogue with at least two levels of barbarian, for example), she automatically gains improved uncanny dodge (see below) instead.
Improved Uncanny Dodge (Ex): A rogue of 8th level or higher
can no longer be flanked; she can react to opponents on opposite
sides of her as easily as she can react to a single attacker. This
defense denies another rogue the ability to sneak attack the
character by flanking her, unless the attacker has at least four more
rogue levels than the target does.
If a character already has uncanny dodge (see above) from a
second class, the character automatically gains improved uncanny
dodge instead, and the levels from the classes that grant uncanny
dodge stack to determine the minimum rogue level required to
flank the character.
Special Abilities: On attaining 10th level, and at every three
levels thereafter (13th, 16th, and 19th), a rogue gains a special ability
of her choice from among the following options.
Crippling Strike (Ex): A rogue with this ability can sneak attack
opponents with such precision that her blows weaken and hamper
them. An opponent damaged by one of her sneak attacks also takes 2
points of Strength damage. Ability points lost to damage return on
their own at the rate of 1 point per day for each damaged ability.
Defensive Roll (Ex): The rogue can roll with a potentially lethal
blow to take less damage from it than she otherwise would. Once
per day, when she would be reduced to 0 or fewer hit points by
damage in combat (from a weapon or other blow, not a spell or special ability), the rogue can attempt to roll with the damage. To use
this ability, the rogue must attempt a Reflex saving throw (DC =
damage dealt). If the save succeeds, she takes only half damage from
the blow; if it fails, she takes full damage. She must be aware of the
attack and able to react to it in order to execute her defensive roll—
if she is denied her Dexterity bonus to AC, she can’t use this ability.
Since this effect would not normally allow a character to make a
Reflex save for half damage, the rogue’s evasion ability does not
apply to the defensive roll.
Improved Evasion (Ex): This ability works like evasion, except
that while the rogue still takes no damage on a successful Reflex
saving throw against attacks such as a dragon’s breath weapon
or a fireball, henceforth she henceforth takes only half
damage on a failed save. A helpless rogue (such as one who
is unconscious or paralysed) does not gain the benefit of
improved evasion.
Opportunist (Ex): Once per round, the rogue
can make an attack of opportunity against
an opponent who has just been struck for
damage in melee by another character.
This attack counts as the rogue’s attack
of opportunity for that round. Even a
rogue with the Combat Reflexes feat
can’t use the opportunist ability more
than once per round.
Skill Mastery: The rogue becomes so
certain in the use of certain skills that
she can use them reliably even under
adverse conditions. Upon gaining this
ability, she selects a number of skills
equal to 3 + her Intelligence modifier.
When making a skill check with one
of these skills, she may take 10 even
if stress and distractions would
normally prevent her from doing
so. A rogue may gain this special
ability multiple times, selecting
additional skills for it to apply
to each time.
Slippery Mind (Ex): This
ability represents the rogue’s
ability to wriggle free from
magical effects that would
otherwise control or compel her. If a rogue with slippery
mind is affected by an enchantment spell or effect and
fails her saving throw, she can attempt it again 1 round
later at the same DC. She gets only this one extra chance
to succeed on her saving throw.
Feat: A rogue may gain a bonus feat in place of a
special ability. 

SORCERER
Sorcerers create magic the
way a poet creates poems, with
inborn talent honed by
practice. They have no books, no
mentors, no theories—just raw
power that they direct at will.
Some sorcerers claim that the blood
of dragons courses through their veins.
That claim may even be true in some
cases—it is common knowledge that certain
powerful dragons can take humanoid form and
even have humanoid lovers, and it’s difficult
to prove that a given sorcerer does not have
a dragon ancestor. It’s true that sorcerers
often have striking good looks, usually
with a touch of the exotic that hints
at an unusual heritage. Others
hold that the claim is either an
unsubstantiated boast on the
part of certain sorcerers or
envious gossip on the
part of those who lack
the sorcerer’s gift.
Adventures: The
typical sorcerer adventures in order to
improve his abilities. Only by testing
his limits can he expand them. A
sorcerer’s power is inborn—part of
his soul. Developing this power is a quest
in itself for many sorcerers, regardless of how
they wish to use their power.
Some good sorcerers are driven by the
need to prove themselves. Marked as
different by their power, they seek to win
a place in society and to prove themselves to others. Evil sorcerers,
however, also feel themselves set apart from others—apart and
above. They adventure to gain power over those they look down
upon.

Characteristics: Sorcerers cast spells through innate power
rather than through careful training and study. Their magic is
intuitive rather than logical. Sorcerers know fewer spells than
wizards do and acquire powerful spells more slowly than wizards,
but they can cast spells more often and have no need to select and
prepare their spells ahead of time. Sorcerers do not specialize in
certain schools of magic the way wizards sometimes do.
Since sorcerers gain their powers without undergoing the years of
rigorous study that wizards go through, they don’t have the
background of arcane knowledge than most wizards have. However,
they do have more time to learn fighting skills, and they are
proficient with simple weapons.
Alignment: For a sorcerer, magic is an intuitive art, not a science.
Sorcery favors the free, chaotic, creative spirit over the disciplined
mind, so sorcerers tend slightly toward chaos over law.
Religion: Some sorcerers favor Boccob (god of magic), while
others revere Wee Jas (goddess of death and magic). However, many
sorcerers follow some other deity, or none at all. (Wizards typically
learn to follow Boccob or Wee Jas from their mentors, but most
sorcerers are self-taught, with no master to induct them into a
religion).
Background: Sorcerers develop rudimentary powers at puberty.
Their first spells are incomplete, spontaneous, uncontrolled, and
sometimes dangerous. A household with a budding sorcerer in it
may be troubled by strange sounds or lights, which can create the
impression that the place is haunted. Eventually, the young sorcerer
understands the power that he has been wielding unintentionally.
From that point on, he can begin practicing and improving his
powers.
Sometimes a sorcerer is fortunate enough to come under the care
of an older, more experienced sorcerer, someone who can help him
understand and use his new powers. More often, however, sorcerers
are on their own, feared by erstwhile friends and misunderstood by
family.
Sorcerers have no sense of identity as a group. Unlike wizards,
they gain little by sharing their knowledge and have no strong
incentive to work together.
Races: Most sorcerers are humans or half-elves, but the innate
talent for sorcery is unpredictable, and it can show up in any of the
common races.
Arcane spellcasters from savage lands or from among the brutal
humanoids are more likely to be sorcerers than wizards. Kobolds are
especially likely to take up this path, and they are fierce, if inarticulate, proponents of the “blood of the dragons” theory.
Other Classes: Sorcerers find that they have the most in
common with members of other largely self-taught classes, such as
druids and rogues. They sometimes find themselves at odds with
members of the more disciplined classes, such as paladins and
monks. Since they cast the same spells as wizards but do so in a
different way, they sometimes find themselves in competition with
wizards.
Role: A sorcerer tends to define his role based on his spell
selection. A sorcerer who focuses on damage-dealing spells becomes
a center of the party’s offensive power. Another may rely on more
subtle magics, such as charms and illusions, and thus take a quieter
role. A party with a sorcerer should strongly consider including a
second spellcaster, such as a bard, cleric, druid, or even a wizard, to
make up for the sorcerer’s lack of versatility. Since a sorcerer often
has a powerful presence that gives him a way with people, he may
serve as the “face” for an adventuring party, negotiating, bargaining,
and speaking for others. The sorcerer’s spells often help him sway
others or gain information, so he makes an excellent spy or diplomat
for an adventuring party. 
GAME RULE INFORMATION
Sorcerers have the following game statistics.
Abilities: Charisma determines how powerful a spell a sorcerer
can cast, how many spells he can cast per day, and how hard those
spells are to resist (see Spells, below). Like a wizard, a sorcerer benefits from high Dexterity and Constitution scores.
Alignment: Any.
Hit Die: d4.
Class Skills
The sorcerer’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are Bluff
(Cha), Concentration (Con), Craft (Int), Knowledge (arcana) (Int),
Profession (Wis), and Spellcraft (Int). See Chapter 4: Skills for skill
descriptions.
Skill Points at 1st Level: (2 + Int modifier) × 4.
Skill Points at Each Additional Level: 2 + Int modifier. 
Class Features
All of the following are class features of the sorcerer.
Weapon and Armor Proficiency: Sorcerers are proficient with
all simple weapons. They are not proficient with any type of armor
or shield. Armor of any type interferes with a sorcerer’s arcane
gestures, which can cause his spells with somatic components to fail.
Spells: A sorcerer casts arcane spells (the same type of spells
available to bards and wizards), which are drawn primarily from the
sorcerer/wizard spell list (page 192). He can cast any spell he knows
without preparing it ahead of time, the way a wizard or a cleric must
(see below).
To learn or cast a spell, a sorcerer must have a Charisma score
equal to at least 10 + the spell level (Cha 10 for 0-level spells, Cha 11
for 1st-level spells, and so forth). The Difficulty Class for a saving
throw against a sorcerer’s spell is 10 + the spell level + the sorcerer’s
Charisma modifier.
Like other spellcasters, a sorcerer can cast only a certain number
of spells of each spell level per day. His base daily spell allotment is
given on Table 3–16: The Sorcerer. In addition, he receives bonus
spells per day if he has a high Charisma score (see Table 1–1: Ability
Modifiers and Bonus Spells, page 8).
A sorcerer’s selection of spells is extremely limited. A sorcerer
begins play knowing four 0-level spells (also called cantrips) and two
1st-level spells of your choice. At each new sorcerer level, he gains
one or more new spells, as indicated on Table 3–17: Sorcerer Spells
Known. (Unlike spells per day, the number of spells a sorcerer
knows is not affected by his Charisma score; the numbers on Table
3–17 are fixed.) These new spells can be common spells chosen from
the sorcerer/wizard spell list (page 192), or they can be unusual
spells that the sorcerer has gained some understanding of by study.
For example, a sorcerer with a scroll or spellbook detailing an
unusual sorcerer/wizard spell (one not on the sorcerer/wizard spell
list in this book) could select that spell as one of his new spells for
attaining a new level, provided that it is of the right spell level. The
sorcerer can’t use this method of spell acquisition to learn spells at a
faster rate, however.
Upon reaching 4th level, and at every even-numbered sorcerer
level after that (6th, 8th, and so on), a sorcerer can choose to learn a
new spell in place of one he already knows. In effect, the sorcerer
“loses” the old spell in exchange for the new one. The new spell’s
level must be the same as that of the spell being exchanged, and it
must be at least two levels lower than the highest-level sorcerer spell
the sorcerer can cast. For instance, upon reaching 4th-level, a
sorcerer could trade in a single 0-level spell (two spell levels below
the highest-level sorcerer spell he can cast, which is 2nd) for a
different 0-level spell. At 6th level, he could trade in a single 0-level
or 1st-level spell (since he now can cast 3rd-level sorcerer spells) for
a different spell of the same level. A sorcerer may swap only a single
spell at any given level, and must choose whether or not to swap the
spell at the same time that he gains new spells known for the level.
Unlike a wizard or a cleric, a sorcerer need not prepare his spells
in advance. He can cast any spell he knows at any time, assuming he
has not yet used up his spells per day for that spell level. For
example, at 1st level, the sorcerer Hennet can cast four 1st-level
spells per day—three for being 1st level (see Table 3–16: The
Sorcerer), plus one thanks to his Charisma score of 15 (see Table 1–
1: Ability Modifiers and Bonus Spells, page 8). However, he knows
only two 1st-level spells: magic missile and sleep (see Table 3–17:
Sorcerer Spells Known). Thus, on any given day, he can cast some
combination of the two spells a total of four times. He does not have
to decide ahead of time which spells he’ll cast.
Familiar: A sorcerer can obtain a familiar. Doing so takes 24
hours and uses up magical materials that cost 100 gp. A familiar is a
magical beast that resembles a small animal and is unusually tough
and intelligent. The creature serves as a companion and servant.
The sorcerer chooses the kind of familiar he gets. As the sorcerer
advances in level, his familiar also increases in power.
If the familiar dies or is dismissed by the sorcerer, the sorcerer
must attempt a DC 15 Fortitude saving throw. Failure means he
loses 200 experience points per sorcerer level; success reduces the
loss to one-half that amount. However, a sorcerer’s experience point
total can never go below 0 as the result of a familiar’s demise or
dismissal. For example, suppose that Hennet is a 3rd-level sorcerer
with 3,230 XP when his owl familiar is killed by a bugbear. Hennet
makes a successful saving throw, so he loses 300 XP, dropping him
below 3,000 XP and back to 2nd level (see the Dungeon Master’s Guide
for rules for losing levels). A slain or dismissed familiar cannot be
replaced for a year and day. A slain familiar can be raised from the
dead just as a character can be, and it does not lose a level or a
Constitution point when this happy event occurs.
A character with more than one class that grants a familiar may
have only one familiar at a time.

FAMILIARS
Familiars are magically linked to their masters. In some sense, the
familiar and the master are practically one being. That’s why, for
example, the master can cast a personal range spell on a familiar even
though he can normally cast such a spell only on himself. A familiar is a
normal animal that gains new powers and becomes a magical beast
when summoned to service by a sorcerer or wizard. It retains the
appearance, Hit Dice, base attack bonus, base save bonuses, skills, and
feats of the normal animal it once was, but it is treated as a magical
beast instead of an animal for the purpose of any effect that depends on
its type. Only a normal, unmodified animal may become a familiar. Thus,
a druid/sorcerer can’t use her animal companion as a familiar.
A familiar also grants special abilities to its master (a sorcerer or
wizard), as given on the table below. These special abilities apply only
when the master and familiar are within 1 mile of each other.
Levels of different classes that are entitled to familiars (such as
sorcerer and wizard) stack for the purpose of determining any familiar
abilities that depend on the master’s level.
Familiar Special
Bat Master gains a +3 bonus on Listen checks
Cat Master gains a +3 bonus on Move Silently checks
Hawk Master gains a +3 bonus on Spot checks in bright light
Lizard Master gains a +3 bonus on Climb checks
Owl Master gains a +3 bonus on Spot checks in shadows
Rat Master gains a +2 bonus on Fortitude saves
Raven1
 Master gains a +3 bonus on Appraise checks
Snake2
 Master gains a +3 bonus on Bluff checks
Toad Master gains +3 hit points
Weasel Master gains a +2 bonus on Reflex saves
1 A raven familiar can speak one language of its master’s choice as a
supernatural ability.
2 Tiny viper.
Familiar Basics: Use the basic statistics for a creature of the familiar’s
kind, as given in the Monster Manual, but make the following changes:
Hit Dice: For the purpose of effects related to number of Hit Dice, use
the master’s character level or the familiar’s normal HD total, whichever
is higher.
Hit Points: The familiar has one-half the master’s total hit points (not
including temporary hit points), rounded down, regardless of its actual
Hit Dice. For example, at 2nd level, Hennet has 9 hit points, so his
familiar has 4.
Attacks: Use the master’s base attack bonus, as calculated from all his
classes. Use the familiar’s Dexterity or Strength modifier, whichever is
greater, to get the familiar’s melee attack bonus with natural weapons.
Damage equals that of a normal creature of the familiar’s kind.
Saving Throws: For each saving throw, use either the familiar’s base
save bonus (Fortitude +2, Reflex +2, Will +0) or the master’s (as
calculated from all his classes), whichever is better. The familiar uses its
own ability modifiers to saves, and it doesn’t share any of the other
bonuses that the master might have on saves (from magic items or
feats, for example).
Skills: For each skill in which either the master or the familiar has
ranks, use either the normal skill ranks for an animal of that type or the
master’s skill ranks, whichever are better. In either case, the familiar uses
its own ability modifiers. Regardless of a familiar’s total skill modifiers,
some skills (such as Craft) may remain beyond the familiar’s ability to
use.
Familiar Ability Descriptions: All familiars have special abilities (or
impart abilities to their masters) depending on the master’s combined
level in classes that grant familiars, as shown on the table below. The
abilities given on the table are cumulative.
Natural Armor Adj.: The number noted here is an improvement to the
familiar’s existing natural armor bonus. It represents the preternatural
toughness of a spellcaster’s familiar. 
Int: The familiar’s Intelligence score. Familiars are as smart as people,
though not necessarily as smart as smart people.
Alertness (Ex): The presence of the familiar sharpens its master’s
senses. While a familiar is within arm’s reach, the master gains the
Alertness feat (page 89).
Improved Evasion (Ex): When subjected to an attack that normally
allows a Reflex saving throw for half damage, a familiar takes no damage
if it makes a successful saving throw and half damage even if the saving
throw fails.
Share Spells: At the master’s option, he may have any spell (but not
any spell-like ability) he casts on himself also affect his familiar. The
familiar must be within 5 feet at the time of casting to receive the benefit.
If the spell or effect has a duration other than instantaneous, it stops
affecting the familiar if it moves farther than 5 feet away and will not
affect the familiar again even if it returns to the master before the
duration expires. Additionally, the master may cast a spell with a target of
“You” on his familiar (as a touch range spell) instead of on himself. A
master and his familiar can share spells even if the spells normally do
not affect creatures of the familiar’s type (magical beast).
Empathic Link (Su): The master has an empathic link with his familiar
out to a distance of up to 1 mile. The master cannot see through the
familiar’s eyes, but they can communicate empathically. Because of the
limited nature of the link, only general emotional content (such as fear,
hunger, happiness, curiosity) can be communicated. Note that the low
Intelligence of a low-level master’s familiar limits what the creature is
able to communicate or understand, and even intelligent familiars see
the world differently from humans, so misunderstandings are always
possible.
Because of this empathic link, the master has the same connection to
an item or place that his familiar does. For instance, if his familiar has
seen a room, the master can teleport into that room as if he has seen it
too.
Deliver Touch Spells (Su): If the master is 3rd level or higher, a familiar
can deliver touch spells for him. If the master and the familiar are in
contact at the time the master casts a touch spell, he can designate his
familiar as the “toucher.” The familiar can then deliver the touch spell
just as the master could. As usual, if the master casts another spell
before the touch is delivered, the touch spell dissipates.
Speak with Master (Ex): If the master is 5th level or higher, a familiar
and the master can communicate verbally as if they were using a
common language. Other creatures do not understand the communication without magical help.
Speak with Animals of Its Kind (Ex): If the master is 7th level or higher,
a familiar can communicate with animals of approximately the same kind
as itself (including dire varieties): bats with bats, rats with rodents, cats
with felines, hawks and owls and ravens with birds, lizards and snakes
with reptiles, toads with amphibians, weasels with similar creatures
(weasels, minks, polecats, ermines, skunks, wolverines, and badgers).
Such communication is limited by the intelligence of the conversing
creatures.
Spell Resistance (Ex): If the master is 11th level or higher, a familiar
gains spell resistance equal to the master’s level + 5. To affect the
familiar with a spell, another spellcaster must get a result on a caster
level check (1d20 + caster level; see Spell Resistance, page 177) that
equals or exceeds the familiar’s spell resistance.
Scry on Familiar (Sp): If the master is 13th level or higher, he may scry
on his familiar (as if casting the scrying spell) once per day.
Master Natural
Class Level Armor Adj. Int Special
1st–2nd +1 6 Alertness, improved evasion,
 share spells, empathic link
3rd–4th +2 7 Deliver touch spells
5th–6th +3 8 Speak with master
7th–8th +4 9 Speak with animals of its kind
9th–10th +5 10 —
11th–12th +6 11 Spell resistance
13th–14th +7 12 Scry on familiar
15th–16th +8 13 —
17th–18th +9 14 —
19th–20th +10 15 —

WIZARDS
A few unintelligible words and fleeting gestures carry more power
than a battleaxe, when they are the words and gestures of a wizard.
These simple acts make magic seem easy, but they only hint at the
time the wizard must spend poring over her spellbook preparing
each spell for casting, and the years before that spent in apprenticeship to learn the arts of magic.
Wizards depend on intensive study to create their magic. They
examine musty old tomes, debate magical theory with their peers,
and practice minor magics whenever they can. For a wizard, magic is
not a talent but a difficult, rewarding art.
Adventures: Wizards conduct their adventures with caution and
forethought. When prepared, they can use their spells to devastating
effect. When caught by surprise, they are vulnerable. They seek
knowledge, power, and the resources to conduct their studies. They
may also have any of the noble or ignoble motivations that other
adventurers have.
Characteristics: The wizard’s strength is her spells. Everything
else is secondary. She learns new spells as she experiments and
grows in experience, and she can also learn them from other wizards. In addition to learning new spells, a wizard can, over time,
learn to manipulate her spells so they go farther, work better, or are
improved in some other way.
Some wizards prefer to specialize in a certain type of magic.
Specialization makes a wizard more powerful in her chosen field,
but it denies her access to some of the spells that lie outside that
field. (See School Specialization, page 57.)
Like a sorcerer, a wizard can call a familiar—a small, magical
animal companion that serves her. For some wizards, their familiars
are their only true friends.
Alignment: Overall, wizards show a slight tendency toward law
over chaos because the study of magic rewards those who are
disciplined. Illusionists and transmuters, however, are masters of
deception and change, respectively. They favor chaos over law.
Religion: Wizards commonly revere Boccob (god of magic).
Some, especially necromancers or simply more misanthropic wizards, prefer Wee Jas (goddess of death and magic). Evil necromancers are known to worship Nerull (god of death). Wizards in general
are more devoted to their studies than to their spiritual sides.
Background: Wizards recognize each other as comrades or rivals.
Even wizards from very different cultures or magical traditions have
much in common because they all conform to the same laws of
magic. Unlike fighters or rogues, wizards see themselves as
members of a distinct, if diverse, group. In civilized lands where
wizards study in academies, schools, or guilds, wizards also identify
themselves and others according to membership in these formal
organizations. But while a guild magician may look down her nose
at a rustic wizard who learned his arts from a doddering hermit, she
nevertheless can’t deny the rustic’s identity as a wizard.
Races: Humans take to magic for any of various reasons: curiosity, ambition, lust for power, or just personal inclination. Human
wizards tend to be practical innovators, creating new spells or using
old spells creatively.
Elves are enthralled by magic, and many of them become wizards
for love of the art. Elf wizards see themselves as artists, and they
hold magic in high regard as a wondrous mystery, as opposed to the
more pragmatic human wizards, who see magic more as a set of tools
or tricks.
Illusion magic comes so simply to gnomes that becoming an
illusionist is just natural to brighter and more talented ones. Gnome
wizards who don’t specialize in the school of illusion are rare, but
they don’t suffer under any special stigma. 

Half-elf wizards feel both the elf’s attraction to magic and the
human’s drive to conquer and understand. Some of the most powerful wizards are half-elves.
Dwarf and halfling wizards are rare because their societies don’t
encourage the study of magic. Half-orc wizards are rare because few
half-orcs have the brains necessary for wizardry.
Drow (evil, subterranean elves) often take up wizardry,
but wizards are quite rare among the savage humanoids.
Other Classes: Wizards prefer to work with
members of other classes. They love to cast their
spells from behind strong fighters, to “magic up”
rogues and send them out to scout, and to rely on
the divine healing of clerics. They may find
members of certain classes (such as sorcerers,
rogues, and bards) to be not quite serious
enough, but they’re not judgmental.
Role: The wizard’s role depends somewhat on
her spell selection, but most wizards share certain
similarities in function. They are among the most
offensively minded of the spellcasting classes, with a
broad range of options available for neutralizing
enemies. Some wizards provide great support to
their comrades by way of their spells, while others
may focus on divination or other facets of
wizardry.
GAME RULE
INFORMATION
Wizards have the following game
statistics.
Abilities: Intelligence determines how powerful a spell a
wizard can cast, how many spells
she can cast, and how hard
those spells are to resist (see Spells, below). A
high Dexterity score is helpful for a wizard, who
typically wears little or no armor, because it
provides her with a bonus to Armor Class. A
good Constitution score gives a wizard extra
hit points, a resource that she is otherwise
very low on.
Alignment: Any.
Hit Die: d4.
Class Skills
The wizard’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are
Concentration (Con), Craft (Int), Decipher Script (Int), Knowledge
(all skills, taken individually) (Int), Profession (Wis), and Spellcraft
(Int). See Chapter 4: Skills for skill
descriptions.
Skill Points at 1st Level: (2 + Int
modifier) × 4.
Skill Points at Each Additional
Level: 2 + Int modifier.
Class Features
All of the following are class features
of the wizard.
Weapon and Armor Proficiency:
Wizards are proficient with the club,
dagger, heavy crossbow, light crossbow,
and quarterstaff, but not with any type of
armor or shield. Armor of any type
interferes with a wizard’s movements,
which can cause her spells with somatic
components to fail.
Spells: A wizard casts arcane spells (the
same type of spells available to sorcerers
and bards), which are drawn from the sorcerer/wizard spell list (page 192). A wizard
must choose and prepare her spells ahead
of time (see below).
To learn, prepare, or cast a spell, the
wizard must have an Intelligence score
equal to at least 10 + the spell level (Int 10 for
0-level spells, Int 11 for 1st-level spells, and
so forth). The Difficulty Class for
a saving throw against a wizard’s
spell is 10 + the spell level + the
wizard’s Intelligence modifier.
Like other spellcasters, a wizard
can cast only a certain number of
spells of each spell level per day.
Her base daily spell allotment
is given on Table 3–18: The
Wizard. In addition, she
receives bonus spells per day if she
has a high Intelligence score (see Table 1–1:
Ability Modifiers and Bonus Spells, page 8). 
Unlike a bard or sorcerer, a wizard
may know any number of spells (see
Writing a New Spell into a Spellbook,
page 179). She must choose and
prepare her spells ahead of time by
getting a good night’s sleep and spending
1 hour studying her spellbook. While
studying, the wizard decides which spells
to prepare (see Preparing Wizard Spells,
page 177).
Bonus Languages: A wizard may
substitute Draconic for one of the bonus
languages available to the character because
of her race (see Chapter 2: Races). Many
ancient tomes of magic are written in
Draconic, and apprentice wizards often
learn it as part of their studies.
Familiar: A wizard can obtain a familiar in
exactly the same manner as a sorcerer can. See the
sorcerer description and the accompanying
Familiars sidebar for details.
Scribe Scroll: At 1st level, a wizard gains
Scribe Scroll as a bonus feat. This feats enables
her to create magic schools (see Scribe Scroll, page 99, and
Creating Magic Items, page 282 of the Dungeon
Master’s Guide).
Bonus Feats: At 5th, 10th, 15th, and 20th
level, a wizard gains a bonus feat. At each
such opportunity, she can choose a
metamagic feat, an item creation feat, or
Spell Mastery. The wizard must still
meet all prerequisites for a bonus feat,
including caster level minimums. (See
Chapter 5 for descriptions of feats and
their prerequisites.)
These bonus feats are in addition to
the feat that a character of any class gets
every three levels (as given on Table
3–2: Experience and Level-Dependent Benefits, page 22). The wizard
is not limited to the categories of item creation feats, metamagic
feats, or Spell Mastery when choosing these feats.
Spellbooks: A wizard must study her spellbook
each day to prepare her spells (see Preparing Wizard
Spells, page 177). She cannot prepare any spell not
recorded in her spellbook, except for read magic, which all
wizards can prepare from memory.
A wizard begins play with a spellbook
containing all 0-level wizard spells (except those
from her prohibited school or schools, if any;
see School Specialization, page 57) plus three
1st-level spells of your choice. For each
point of Intelligence bonus the wizard has
(see Table 1–1: Ability Modifiers and
Bonus Spells, page 8), the spellbook
holds one additional 1st-level spell
of your choice. At each new
wizard level, she gains two new
spells of any spell level or levels that
she can cast (based on her new
wizard level) for her spellbook. For
example, when a wizard attains 5th
level, she can cast 3rd-level spells.
At this point, she can add two new
3rd-level spells to her spellbook, or one
2nd-level spell and one 3rd-level
spell, or any combination of two
spells between 1st and 3rd level. At
any time, a wizard can also add
spells found in other wizards’
spellbooks to her own (see Adding
Spells to a Wizard’s Spellbook, page
178). 

ARCANE SPELLS AND ARMOR
Wizards and sorcerers do not know how to wear armor effectively. If
desired, they can wear armor anyway (though they’ll be clumsy in it), or
they can gain training in the proper use of armor (with the various Armor
Proficiency feats—light, medium, and heavy—and the Shield Proficiency
feat), or they can multiclass to add a class that grants them armor
proficiency (see Multiclass Characters later in this chapter). Even if a
wizard or sorcerer is wearing armor with which he or she is proficient,
however, it might still interfere with spellcasting.
Most characters have a difficult time casting arcane spells while
wearing armor or carrying shields (see Arcane Spell Failure, page 122).
The armor restricts the complicated gestures that a wizards or sorcerer
must make while casting any spell that has a somatic component (most
do). To find the arcane spell failure chance for a wizard or sorcerer
wearing a certain type of armor, see Table 7–6: Armor and Shields (page
123).
By contrast, bards not only know how to wear light armor effectively,
but they can also ignore the arcane spell failure chance for such armor.
However, they too wear heavier armor ineffectively and must either learn
to wear heavier armor via the appropriate Armor Proficiency feat
(medium or heavy) or add a class (such as fighter) that grants them such
proficiency as a class feature. A bard wearing armor heavier than light or
using any type of shield incurs the normal arcane spell failure chance,
even if he becomes proficient with that armor.
If a spell doesn’t have a somatic component, an arcane spellcaster can
cast it with no problem while wearing armor. Such spells can also be cast
even if the caster’s hands are bound or if he or she is grappling
(although Concentration checks still apply normally). Also, the
metamagic feat Still Spell allows a spellcaster to prepare or cast a spell at
one spell level higher than normal without the somatic component. This
also provides a way to cast a spell while wearing armor without risking
arcane spell failure. See Chapter 5: Feats for more about metamagic feats
such as Still Spell.

SCHOOL SPECIALIZATION
A school is one of eight groupings of spells, each defined by a common
theme, such as illusion or necromancy. If desired, a wizard may
specialize in one school of magic (see below). Specialization allows a
wizard to cast extra spells from her chosen school, but she then never
learns to cast spells from some other schools. Essentially, the wizard
gains exceptional mastery over a single school by neglecting the study of
other schools.
A specialist wizard can prepare one additional spell of her specialty
school per spell level each day. She also gains a +2 bonus on Spellcraft
checks to learn the spells of her chosen school (see Adding Spells to a
Wizard’s Spellbook, page 178).
The wizard must choose whether to specialize and, if she does so,
choose her specialty at 1st level. At this time, she must also give up two
other schools of magic (unless she chooses to specialize in divination;
see below), which become her prohibited schools. For instance, if she
chooses to specialize in conjuration, she might decide to give up
enchantment and necromancy, or evocation and transmutation. A wizard
can never give up divination to fulfill this requirement. Spells of the
prohibited school or schools are not available to the wizard, and she
can’t even cast such spells from scrolls or fire them from wands. She
may not change either her specialization or her prohibited schools later.
The eight schools of arcane magic are abjuration, conjuration,
divination, enchantment, evocation, illusion, necromancy, and transmutation. Spells that do not fall into any of these schools are called
universal spells.
Abjuration: Spells that protect, block, or banish. An abjuration
specialist is called an abjurer.
Conjuration: Spells that bring creatures or materials to the caster. A
conjuration specialist is called a conjurer.
Divination: Spells that reveal information. A divination specialist is
called a diviner. Unlike the other specialists, a diviner must give up only
one other school.
Enchantment: Spells that imbue the recipient with some property or
grant the caster power over another being. An enchantment specialist is
called an enchanter.
Evocation: Spells that manipulate energy or create something from
nothing. An evocation specialist is called an evoker.
Illusion: Spells that alter perception or create false images. An illusion
specialist is called an illusionist.
Necromancy: Spells that manipulate, create, or destroy life or life force.
A necromancy specialist is called a necromancer.
Transmutation: Spells that transform the recipient physically or change
its properties in a more subtle way. A transmutation specialist is called a
transmuter.
Universal: Not a school, but a category for spells that all wizards can
learn. A wizard cannot select universal as a specialty school or as a
prohibited school. Only a limited number of spells fall into this category.